RÉCITAL 2005, Dourdan, 6-10 juin 2005 
Linguistic representation of Finnish in the medical domain spoken 
language translation system 
Marianne Santaholma 
University of Geneva, ETI, TIM/ISSCO 
40, bvd du Pont-d’Arve 
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland 
Marianne.Santaholma@eti.unige.ch 
 
Mots-clefs – Keywords 
Grammaire d’unification, traduction automatique multilingue de la parole, interlingue, sous-
langage, finnois. 
Domain specific unification grammar, multilingual spoken language translation, interlingua, 
sub-language, Finnish. 
Résumé – Abstract  
Dans cet article nous décrivons le développement des ressources linguistiques du finnois pour 
un système de traduction automatique de la parole dans le domaine médical: MedSLT. Le 
travail inclut la construction des corpus médicaux en finnois, le développement de la 
grammaire finlandaise pour la génération, le développement du lexique finlandais et la 
définition des règles de mapping interlingue-finnois pour la traduction multilingue. Nous 
avons découvert que le finnois peut être introduit dans l'architecture existante de MedSLT 
sans trop de difficultés. En effet, malgré les différences entre l'anglais et le finnois, la 
grammaire finlandaise a pu être créée en adaptant manuellement la grammaire anglaise 
originale. Les premiers résultats de l'évaluation de la traduction anglais-finnois sont 
encourageants. 
This paper describes the development of Finnish linguistic resources for use in MedSLT, an 
Open Source medical domain speech-to-speech translation system. The paper describes the 
collection of medical Finnish corpora, the creation of a Finnish grammar by adapting the 
original English grammar, the composition of a domain specific Finnish lexicon and the 
definition of interlingua to Finnish mapping rules for multilingual translation. It is shown that 
Finnish can be effectively introduced into the existing MedSLT framework and that despite 
the differences between English and Finnish, the Finnish grammar can be created by manual 
adaptation from the original English grammar. Regarding further development, the initial 
evaluation results of English-Finnish speech-to-speech translation are encouraging. 
Marianne Santaholma 
1 Introduction 
The basic architecture of a speech-to-speech translation system typically includes several 
components. Any speech-to-speech translation system requires at least a module for the 
source language speech recognition, a translation module which converts the recognised and 
parsed source language string into the target language, and a speech synthesis module for the 
target language output speech generation. These components may be based on different kinds 
of architectures. For example translations may be obtained using a variety of translation 
methodologies, like rule-based, statistical or example-based translation engines. In past years 
statistical methods have been commonly used in speech systems. This even to the point that it 
may have given the impression that rule-based methods are no longer relevant. The general 
success of statistical methods over rule-based methods is based principally on the general 
robustness of the statistical systems and on the overall easiness of system development. 
However in some special fields, like for example in the medical domain, the reliability of the 
system is more important than the general robustness of the system. This suggests that in 
these domains rule-based methods can be better suited (Knight et al., 2001). MedSLT is an 
Open Source project which is developing a generic platform for building this kind of rule-
based system where reliability is a crucial issue (See Rayner, Bouillon, 2002, Rayner et al., 
2004). To compare rule-based to statistical methods there exist two versions of the system, on 
based on grammar-based language modelling (GLM) and one on statistical language 
modelling (SLM). These versions are trained on the same corpus, and evaluated on a test 
corpus collected using both versions of the system. The experiments show that in terms of 
number of sentences translated, the GLM and SLM scored equally well. However, (Rayner et 
al., 2004) concluded that the GLM was preferable in terms of presenting a more predictable 
interface. 
A rule-based spoken translation system implies several different resources: a description of 
the source language (SL) and of the target language (TL) and a set of translation rules, for 
example transfer rules or interlingua mapping rules. Since in general the development of 
linguistic resources used in translation systems is laborious and time consuming, in order to 
reduce the development effort needed for multilingual rule-based systems, we focus on 
developing general unification grammars that can be used for speech recognition, analysis, 
and generation. The main feature is that the general grammars will be automatically 
specialised for these different tasks with a corpus and an example-based learning method 
(Rayner et al, 2000). The grammar specialisation is necessary in order to compile the 
grammar into CFG form, to reduce the ambiguity of the grammar and to build the generation 
grammar.  
This paper presents the development of linguistic resources for Finnish for the MedSLT 
system. The development includes the collection of the medical sub-domain corpora, the 
creation of the Finnish generation grammar and lexicon, and the definition of interlingua to 
Finnish mapping rules, used by the multilingual translation module. The interest of working 
on the Finnish language is that despite different natural language processing (NLP) projects 
including Finnish, it has not yet been used extensively in speech-to-speech translation 
systems. Another motivation is that as Finnish is not an Indo-European language, it does not 
necessarily share the same word and sentence structure with English and French. Therefore it 
allows the study of the grammar adaptation and the entire multilingual MedSLT system 
architecture including the MedSLT interlingua representation from a new perspective. 
Linguistic representation of Finnish in the medical domain spoken language translation 
system  
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the Open Source speech translation 
system MedSLT. Section 3 presents the Finnish module (sub-domain corpora, Finnish 
generation grammar and lexicon, and interlingua to Finnish mapping rules). Section 4 
presents the evaluation of the MedSLT English to Finnish translation performance and 
Section 5 concludes. 
2 The MedSLT system 
MedSLT (MedSLT, 2005, Rayner et al., 2003) is a medical domain spoken language 
translation (SLT) system, which is developed to translate doctor-patient examination 
dialogue. Translation is one-way; the system translates the diagnosis questions asked by the 
doctor. The questions are formulated so that the patient can answer them non-verbally by 
nodding or shaking the head, by pointing at a body part or similar. The system coverage is 
organised into medical sub-domains by symptom classes. The current system sub-domains 
include the emergency relevant sub-domains of headaches, chest pains and abdominal pains, 
each supporting a vocabulary of between 300 and 500 words. The current system prototype 
translates from English into such structurally different languages as French, Japanese and 
Finnish. The system includes also initial versions of French-English, Japanese-English, 
Spanish-English and English-Spanish. 
The basic architecture adopted in the MedSLT-system is a compromise between the fixed-
phrase translation (e.g Phraselator, 2005) and the rule-based linguistic methods (Wahlster, 
2000, Rayner et al., 2000). At runtime the system behaves like a phrasal translator, which 
translates beforehand defined patterns. In contrast, the compile time architecture is based on 
general linguistic resources. The grammars used in the MedSLT system are written in 
unification grammar formalism in a SICStus Prolog based feature-value notation. The 
unification grammars are compiled into grammar-based language models using the Open 
Source Regulus toolkit (Regulus, 2005) (figure 1: Regulus compile time component). 
Language models are in GSL form, suitable for use with the Nuance platform (Nuance, 2005). 
The translation is based on the interlingua approach of MT.  
MedSLT
Runtime
System
Java Client Library
(regclient) Regulus 
Runtime 
Speech Platform Interface Process Time System
(regserver) Translation Server
Nuance Voice Platform
(recognition, playback)
Regulus 
Application Unification Compile Specific Data Grammar Database Time Component
 
Figure 1 : MedSLT system architecture 
The MedSLT runtime system is accessed through a GUI (illustrated in figure 1), which allows 
the simple utilisation of the system for the diagnosing doctor. The flow of information in the 
Marianne Santaholma 
MedSLT system is as follows. First the input speech is recognised using the recogniser built 
on the Nuance platform. The output of the recogniser is the semantic representation of the 
input produced by using the specialised grammar. This semantic representation of the SL is 
then passed to a discourse processing module, which interprets it in the context of the 
previous dialogue, in order to resolve possible ellipsis. The resolved SL representation is 
transformed into an SL independent interlingua representation. In the MedSLT interlingua 
representation each clause is treated as a flat list of attribute-value pairs (see section 3.4.). The 
interlingual form is transferred into a TL surface string using a generation grammar, and 
finally passed to a speech synthesis unit. The mapping of the SL dependent representation 
into interlingua and the mapping of interlingua into a TL dependent representation is obtained 
by manually developed interlingua mapping rules.  
3 Finnish linguistic resources 
3.1 Sub-domain corpora  
The first step towards the development of the Finnish module for the MedSLT system was to 
create the Finnish headache and chest pain sub-domain corpora. These corpora serve as the 
primary source to decide what kind of structure rules and vocabulary is necessary to introduce 
to the Finnish module. The corpora were created by translating (and adapting) the original 
English corpora. The objective was to find the equivalent Finnish questions for the original 
English diagnosis questions. Since in the current MedSLT system Finnish is used only as 
output language it was not regarded necessary, at this point, to take into consideration the 
other possible questions a Finnish doctor might want to include in the system coverage, or the 
different variations of the same question. Therefore it was justified to translate the original 
English corpora into Finnish instead of collecting authentic Finnish data. The translated 
Finnish diagnosis questions were, however, revised by Finnish medical doctors (Santaholma, 
2005).  
Two essential issues were taken into consideration when translating the diagnosis questions 
into Finnish: the particular character of spoken language and the special situation in which the 
utterances were intended to be used. The spoken language style differs markedly from the 
written style. Generally the spoken language is more informal and commonly contains the use 
of ill-formed language, such as incomplete sentences, wrong word cases, and unusual word 
order. This special character of spoken language influenced the content of the Finnish corpora 
and consequently the structure and lexical rules of the Finnish MedSLT grammar. In whole 
the comprehensibility, reliability and simplicity of the utterances were regarded to be more 
important than the actual formulation or style of the sentences. In the context of medical 
examination it is important that the patient feels comfortable and confident. Even more so if 
the questions are asked by a doctor speaking a language the patient does not understand and if 
he/she is listening to the translations of the questions spoken out by a machine. Thus the 
output of the MT system should sound as natural as possible. For the Finnish output the aim 
was to preserve the simplicity of the original English questions without letting the translation 
be influenced too much by the expressions and the structure of the SL.  
The current Finnish MedSLT headache corpus consists of 170 utterances and the chest pain 
corpus of 187 utterances. The concepts of these two corpora overlap considerably, 
subsequently so does the structure of the diagnosis questions. In most cases the questions of 
Linguistic representation of Finnish in the medical domain spoken language translation 
system  
the sub-domains differ only in the vocabulary. The system input languages -like English- 
include commonly some variation in the way the questions can be posed, which makes the 
system more practical to use since the doctor is not obliged to remember the exact 
formulation of the questions but rather the main concepts of the questions. For the output 
language this variation is not necessary. The English question variants corresponding to one 
concept in the corpora are translated into Finnish by the same utterance. Due to this, the 
Finnish corpora are slightly more restricted in comparison to the SL corpora. 
3.2 Finnish MedSLT grammar rules 
The MedSLT Finnish generation grammar is so far a domain specific grammar for speech 
adapted from the general Regulus English grammar used in the MedSLT system (Regulus, 
2005). Currently the Finnish grammar contains 57 grammar rules and around 530 lexical 
entries. The current grammar rules cover the basic constructions, which are necessary for the 
MedSLT headache and chest pain sub-domains. The grammar includes syntactic rules for 
declarative, interrogative and elliptical clauses, formation of yes/no questions using subject-
predicate inversion, wh-questions, clause lacking the grammatical subject (replaced by the 
object of the phrase), rules for various kinds of nominal phrases and verbal phrases (like 
transitive and intransitive phrases), rules for adjectival modifiers, including comparatives, 
passive sentences, sentences with past-participles, and rules for different verb and sentence 
modifiers like adverbial modifiers and adverbs. The MedSLT Finnish generation grammar is 
more limited than the standard Finnish grammar regarding the variety of constructions the 
grammar includes. However the grammar does not contain particular structure rules that 
would be considered being merely specific constructions of a medical domain sublanguage. 
The syntax reduction in the range of constructions does rather reflect the specific text type and 
discourse of the domain than the domain specific language itself. Furthermore, we believe 
that a specialised grammar is not solely domain specific but is also constructed after a 
particular discourse type. (Santaholma, 2005) 
 
vp:[sem=concat(Vbar, concat(Advp, Np)), vform=Vform, subcat=A, inv=Inv, agr=Agr, 
subj_n_case=Case, np_n_type=nonsubj, subj_sem_n_type=SubjType, gapsin=null, gapsout=null] --> 
 vbar:[sem=Vbar, vform=Vform, inv=Inv, subcat=(trans\/personal), subcat=A, agr=Agr, 
np_n_type=nonsubj, subj_n_case=Case, subj_sem_n_type=SubjType, obj_sem_n_type=ObjType, 
obj_case=B, takes_adv_type=AdvpType], 
 ?advp:[sem=Advp, sem_adv_type=AdvpType], 
 np:[sem=Np, wh=n, agr=Agr, sem_n_type=ObjType, n_type=nonsubj, case=(ptv\/nom), 
case=B, gapsin=GIn, gapsout=GOut]. 
 
Figure 2 : Finnish transitive verb phrase rule  
The natural languages appear to have quite a lot of common structure. Consequently the 
exhaustive grammars of different languages share structural rules and properties at least to 
some point. During the Finnish grammar development was discovered that the basic English 
structures were relatively easy to adapt to corresponding Finnish constructions. This at least 
when using as a reference a grammar that covers similar kinds of systematic patterns of the 
same restricted discourse type. When comparing the MedSLT English and Finnish grammars, 
most of the Finnish rules are very similar to the English counterparts from which they have 
been adapted. When adapting the English grammar the most significant difference between 
Finnish and English is that in Finnish more phenomena are resolved at morphology level 
rather than in the syntax like in English. Finnish is a highly agglutinative language, in which 
Marianne Santaholma 
nouns, adjectives, pronouns and numerals inflect in (around) 15 cases. Therefore an essential 
feature in the Finnish MedSLT grammar rules is the feature 'case'. For example in the Finnish 
verbal phrase rule used for generating clauses including a transitive verb the allowed 
inflectional case of the subject and the object of the utterance are defined (figure 2). This is 
necessary in order to prevent the over-generation. Furthermore, in Finnish the different 
grammatical functions as well as time, place, ownership, manner etc. for which English 
normally uses a preposition are expressed by suffixes. The correspondence of the Finnish 
cases with the English prepositions is, however, not exactly straightforward. As a whole, 
Finnish is a very complex and productive language regarding morphology whereas the syntax 
is rather straightforward and free to certain point.  
3.3 Lexicon and lexical entries 
The Finnish MedSLT lexicon currently includes around 530 distinct Finnish lexical entries 
covering the MedSLT headache and chest pain sub-domains. However, it is noteworthy that 
the different inflections of the same Finnish entry are counted as distinct lexical entries. 
Therefore, the actual total of different Finnish lemmas is slightly smaller than the figure may 
indicate. The Finnish lexicon includes rules for the common part-of-speech categories – i.e. 
for verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, specifiers, wh-question words, post-positions and for 
prepositions. The multiword expressions (~lexicalised NPs) that define the sentence or the 
verb of sentence are placed under the category of adverbials. 
The Finnish lexical entries include a fairly comprehensive amount of different information. 
The features defined for instance in the verb entries include, - among others - the verb type, 
the sub-categorisation, semantic type of the possible subject, object, predicative, adverb and 
adverbial, as well as the allowed inflectional cases of these constituents in the context of the 
verb in question (figure 3). The Finnish verbs inflect in tense, mode and person. 
 
verb:[sem=[[event, lievittää], [tense, present]], vform=q_ko, agr=sg, subcat=trans, 
subj_n_case=nom, subj_sem_n_type=(cause\/activity), obj_sem_n_type=perception_body, 
obj_case=ptv, takes_adv_type=frequency] --> lievittääkö. 
 
Figure 3 : Finnish verb entry. The question form of the verb ‘lievittää’; ‘to relieve’, in the 
present, third person singular.  
As a consequence of the considerable amount of the different inflectional cases, the amount of 
different word forms of the same lexical entry may be quite extensive in the Finnish lexicon. 
An advantage of a limited domain application, like MedSLT system, is that the amount of 
distinct word forms necessary in the application is restricted. The lexicon is actually possible 
to write manually (Morphological tools like Mmorph (Petitpierre/Russell, 1995), or PC-
Kimmo (Koskenniemi, 1983) are not integrated in the current MedSLT system). Evidently the 
enumeration of all the possible inflectional cases for every lexical entry is laborious and 
contains a lot of repetition. However the encountered repetition may be decreased to a certain 
point by the systematic use of macros in the lexical rules. The macros are extensively used in 
the MedSLT English lexicon. The Finnish lexicon currently contains macros mainly in 
adjective and noun entries.  
Linguistic representation of Finnish in the medical domain spoken language translation 
system  
3.4 Interlingua-Finnish mapping rules 
The interlingua mapping rules enable the transformation of the a) SL representation through 
b) Interlingua into the c) TL representation. For example if we want to translate the English 
utterance ‘Is the headache made worse by red wine?’ in Finnish ”Pahentaako punaviini 
päänsärkyä?”; (*make_worse red wine headache?), we first need to write rules to transfer the 
English source representation: 
a) source_representation=[[adj,worse],[cause,red_wine],[event,make_adj],[prep,subj], 
[secondary_symptom,headache],[spec,the_sing],[tense,present],[utterance_type,ynq], 
[voice,passive]] 
into the corresponding interlingua representation: 
b) interlingua=[[sc,when], [clause,[[utterance_type,dcl], [pronoun,you], [tense,present], 
[voice,active], [action,drink], [cause,red_wine]]], [event,become_worse], 
[symptom,headache], [tense,present], [utterance_type,ynq], [voice,active]] 
After that we still need to develop rules for transferring the Interlingua representation into the 
Finnish target representation: 
c) target_representation=[[cause,punaviini], [event,pahentaa], [symptom,päänsärky], 
[tense,present], [utterance_type,ynq]] 
MedSLT makes use of two types of interlingua rules: transfer_lexicon rules and more complex 
transfer_rules.  The previous ones, the transfer_lexicon entries, are employed when there is one-to-
one correspondence between the interlingua expression and the natural language expression. 
In practice, both, the source part and the target part of the rule, contain only one element. 
Tranfer_rule entries map together several elements.  
The MedSLT interlingua representation of an utterance is mostly based on the flat list of 
semantic features obtained in the analysis. Only some causal and temporal structures are 
represented as slightly nested structure (like above ‘Is the headache made worse by red 
wine?’). This kind of representation is possible in the restricted domain like the one of 
MedSLT. Corresponding the character of the application, the MedSLT interlingua is aimed to 
be easily portable to new medical sub-domains. Furthermore, the mapping rule development 
is desired to be as straightforward as possible for every interlingua ↔ natural language pair. 
The interlingua-Finnish mapping rules currently enable the translation from other MedSLT 
system languages into Finnish in the headache sub-domain. The nested structures for causal 
and temporal expressions are not yet implemented in Finnish but the current generated 
Finnish semantic representations of utterances are based solely on the flat representations. In 
whole, the interlingua representation is more atomic than the actual Finnish target 
representation. The Finnish output representation resembles in fact more the English source 
representation. Thus interlingua-Finnish mapping rules contain a lot of complex transfer_rules 
in order to map the different interlingua and Finnish target language structures. The advantage 
of the more complicated transfer rules is that the word context is included in the rule. The 
disadvantage is that if the context is always required the translation may lose robustness.  
Marianne Santaholma 
4 Evaluation of the translation 
The translation performance of the MedSLT English-Finnish language pair was evaluated on 
unseen data and the obtained results were compared with the corresponding results of the 
English-French language pair. The (speech) data used for the evaluation was collected during 
November 2004 in twelve data collection sessions on the headache sub-domain. A total of 
870 spoken utterances were collected. For the recognition of English input were used both 
GLM and SLM based versions of the English recogniser (Recognition results are analysed 
and described in detail in Rayner et al, 2004, Rayner et al, 2005). The correctly recognised 
English sentences (judged by English native speakers) were translated into Finnish and the 
acceptability of these translations were judged by 3 Finnish native speakers with grades of 
‘good’ (semantically and grammatically correct sentence), ‘acceptable’ (semantically correct 
translation) and ‘bad’ (semantically and grammatically incorrect sentence).  
The translation performance into Finnish was somewhat weaker than into French but 
comparable if taking into consideration the non-translated sentences (figure 4). Out of the 
correctly recognised utterances (395 utterance; 45,4% of a total of 870 utterance) 60% of 
Finnish translations were judged as 'good', 4,4% of translations were assessed as 'acceptable' 
and 0,5% as 'bad'. The corresponding figures for French were 'good' 75,8%, 'acceptable' 
19,2% and 'bad' 0,7%. Generally the Finnish judges graded the translation as 'bad' if it 
contained a word in the wrong inflectional case -even if the word itself was correct. The 
utterances judged as 'acceptable' contained mostly special medical terminology or particular 
expressions describing the pain that were not familiar for the judges.  
The most remarkable difference between the Eng-Fin and Eng-Fre translation performance 
was thus the amount of utterances left without translation (see figure 4: 'no translation'): of 
correctly recognised English utterances 36% were not translated into Finnish, whereas only 
4,4% of utterances were left without translation into French. When analysing the sentences 
that were not translated into Finnish it was noticed that in most cases the translation failed 
because the Finnish lexicon either lacks a lexical entry or a certain form (inflectional case, 
verb tense/person) of the lexical entry (lexical gaps). Even if the lexicon contained the word 
in some form, the grammar prevents the generation of sentences using in-correct word forms. 
Furthermore the un-translated sentences were mainly not in coverage sentences (Proportion of 
not in coverage 453 (52.1%) and in coverage 417 (47.9%) utterances in corpus of total of 870 
sentences). 
8 0
6 0
4 0
2 0
0
b d  a c c e p t a b le  a d  re c o g n i t i g o oo n b a d  t r a n s la t i o n n o  t r a n s la t i o n
t ra n s la t io n t ra n s la t i o n
F IN 9 g lm 5 4 , 6 2 7 , 2 2 0 , 2 3 1 5 ,
F IN  s lm 5 9 , 8 2 5 , 9 1 , 6 0 1 2 , 8
F R E  g lm 5 4 , 6 3 4 , 4 8 , 7 0 , 3 2
F R E  s lm 5 9 , 8 3 0 , 8 7 , 7 0 , 2 1 , 5
Figure 4 : Comparison of English-to Finnish and English-to French translation performance 
The following examples show lexical gaps: "Does the pain radiate to the neck?" (in coverage 
sentence) and "Is the pain in the neck?" (not in coverage sentence). The Finnish lexicon 
Linguistic representation of Finnish in the medical domain spoken language translation 
system  
includes the word "kaula"; 'neck' in the ablative case, which is used in the system in the 
context of the verbs ‘to radiate’ and ’to spread’. A translation gap is produced when trying to 
translate the utterance "Is the pain in the neck", where the verb "olla"; 'to be', requires the 
adessive case of the word neck. The same problem is encountered, among others, in the 
sentences "Does your headache extend to the back?" and "Does the pain spread to your eye?"  
The Finnish lexicon does not include the words 'back' and 'eye' in the inflectional cases 
required by the verb context and the utterances are left without translation even if the system 
translates the words correctly in utterances "Is the pain above the eye" and "Is the pain in the 
back". In some cases the translation was also unsuccessful because of the lack of needed 
grammar rules. Because of a lacking grammar rule sentences like the following were left 
without translation: "Do you have nausea when you have headaches?" (subordinate 
structure); "Do your headaches come after anxiety?" / "Do you get the headache after 
drinking red wine?"/ "Is the pain relieved after sleep?" (post-positional structure) 
As a whole the acceptability of Finnish translations is comparable to the French, and in 
general the Finnish translations are comprehensible and thus acceptable. Most of the work to 
be done now is on the coverage of the Finnish grammar and lexicon. 
5 Conclusion  
This paper has described the development of Finnish linguistic resources for use in MedSLT, 
an Open Source medical domain speech-to-speech translation system. The development was 
partly done by adapting the already existing resources, and in particular the Finnish grammar 
was created by grammar adaptation from the original English grammar. The grammar 
adaptation was proved to be an efficient way to develop the Finnish MedSLT grammar. The 
syntax rules were mostly highly similar with the original English grammar rules they were 
adapted from. Most difficulties were caused by the complex morphology of Finnish. To avoid 
the generation of non-grammatical sentences the grammar and lexicon rules have to be 
carefully constrained. The manual enumeration of the lexical entries and the different 
inflectional cases of the words is laborious but still feasible by the use of macros in the 
restricted domain application like MedSLT. In more general domains, the use of integrated 
morphology tools is preferable. 
The evaluation of the translation performance of English-Finnish language showed 
encouraging results and by some changes in the coverage of grammar and lexicon the 
translation result will be improved and eventually the Finnish module will be more robust. 
This also confirms that the MedSLT system architecture as a whole is adaptable on restricted 
domain to translate between multiple different languages.  
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank the developers of the original MedSLT system framework Pierrette 
Bouillon and Manny Rayner for all their help and advice. 
Marianne Santaholma 
References 
Knight S., Gorrell G., Rayner M., Milward D., Koeling R., Levin I. (2001), Comparing 
grammar-based and robust approaches to speech understanding: a case study, In Proceedings 
of Eurospeech 2001, Aalborg, Denmark, 1779–1782. 
Koskenniemi K. (1993), Two-level Morphology: A General Computational Model for Word-
Form Recognition and Production, University of Helsinki, Department of General 
Linguistics. 
MedSLT (2005), https://sourceforge.net/projects/medslt/. As of 31 January 2005. 
Nuance (2005), http://www.nuance.com. As of 15 January 2005. 
Petitpierre D., Russell G. (1995), MMORPH-The Multext Morphology Program, Version 2.3: 
October 1995. 
Phraselator (2005), http://www.phraselator.com. As of 15 January 2005. 
Rayner M., Carter D., Bouillon P., Digalakis V., Wirén M. (2000), The Spoken Language 
Translator, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Rayner M., Bouillon P. (2002), A flexible Speech to Speech Phrasebook Translator, In 
Proceedings of ACL-02 Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation: Algorithms and Systems, 
Philadelphia, 69-76. 
Rayner M., Bouillon P., Dalsem Van V., Hockey  B.A., Isahara H., Kanzaki K. (2003), A 
limited-domain English to Japanese medical speech translator build using REGULUS 2, In 
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(demo track), Sapporo, Japan, 137-140. 
Rayner M., Bouillon P., Hockey B. A., Chatzichrisafis N., Starlander M. (2004), Comparing 
Rule-Based and Statistical Approaches to Speech Understanding in a Limited Domain Speech 
Translation System, In Proceedings of TMI 2004, Baltimore, MD USA, 21-29. 
Rayner M., Hockey B A., Bouillon P. (2005), Using Regulus, 
http://cvs.sourceforge.net/viewcvs.py/regulus/Regulus/doc/RegulusDoc.htm. 
As of 31 January 2005. 
Bouillon P., Rayner M., Chatzichrisafis N., Hockey B. A., Santaholma M., Starlander M., 
Nakao  Y., Kanzaki K., Isahara H. (2005) A Generic Multi-Lingual Open Source Platform for 
Limited-Domain Medical Speech Translation, In Proceedings of EAMT 2004, Budapest, 
Hungary. Forthcoming. 
Santaholma M. (2005), Linguistic representation of Finnish language in speech-to-speech 
translation system, Masters thesis. Geneva University, Department of translation and 
interpretation.  
Wahlster W. (Ed.) (2000), Verbmobil: Foundations of Speech-to-speech Translation, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York, Springer-Verlag. 
