TALN 2005, Dourdan, 6-10 juin 2005 
Sentiment Analysis for Issues Monitoring 
 Using Linguistic Resources  
Ecaterina Rascu (1), Kai Schirmer (2) and Johann Haller (1) 
(1) (1) Institut für Angewandte Informationsforschung 
Martin-Luther-Str. 14, D-66111 Saarbrücken 
{kati;hans}@iai.uni-sb.de 
(2) Schirmer Media Research 
Lietzenburger Str. 90, D-10719 Berlin 
kaischirmer@web.de 
Mots-clés :   Etude d’opinion, outil de veille économique, classification des opinions 
Keywords:   Sentiment analysis, issues monitoring system, fine-grained sentiment 
classification 
 
 
Résumé L'identification et l'évaluation des avis, opinions ou jugements exprimés sur un 
sujet, une entreprise, ou un produit sont des tâches essentielles dans le domaine de l'analyse 
des médias. L'étude d'opinion est employée pour repérer de nouvelles tendances, mesurer le 
degré de satisfaction des clients ou pour alerter quand des tendances négatives risquent d'être 
défavorable à l'image de marque de l'entreprise. Dans cet article nous présentons un outil de 
veille économique qui permet de classifier très finement des documents publiés en ligne ainsi 
que d'identifier et d'évaluer les opinions exprimées dans des articles en ligne et des forums de 
discussions. Après la présentation des diverses composantes du système et des ressources 
linguistiques utilisées, nous décrivons en détail SentA, la composante d'étude d'opinions, et 
évaluons sa performance. 
 
Abstract Sentiment analysis dealing with the identification and evaluation of opinions 
towards a topic, a company, or a product is an essential task within media analysis. It is used 
to study trends, determine the level of customer satisfaction, or warn immediately when 
unfavourable trends risk damaging the image of a company. In this paper we present an issues 
monitoring system which, besides text categorization, also performs an extensive sentiment 
analysis of online news and newsgroup postings. Input texts undergo a morpho-syntactic 
Ecaterina Rascu, Kai Schirmer and Johann Haller 
analysis, are indexed using a thesaurus and are categorized into user-specific classes. During 
sentiment analysis, sentiment expressions are identified and subsequently associated with the 
established topics. After presenting the various components of the system and the linguistic 
resources used, we describe in detail SentA1, its sentiment analysis component, and evaluate 
its performance. 
1 Introduction 
In recent years the tendency to exploit the huge amount of information available on the 
internet, especially in form of news articles or newsgroup postings for marketing and 
corporate communication purposes, has increased considerably. Text mining techniques have 
been developed to find relevant texts, classify them into meaningful clusters and also to 
extract specific information from them. One of the more sophisticated information extraction 
tasks, which has proved to be extremely valuable for companies, is the identification of 
sentiments towards a topic, a company, or a product in online news and newsgroup postings. 
This is essential for evaluating trends in public opinion, determining the level of customer 
satisfaction and taking preventive measures in case the level of dissatisfaction risks damaging 
the image of the company.  
Various approaches to automatic sentiment evaluation have been proposed in order to 
efficiently deal with the large amount of available data as well as to reduce the high costs 
associated with the manual evaluation of such information. On the one hand, statistical text 
mining approaches, especially machine learning methods such as support vector machines for 
finding minimum cuts in graphs, have been used in order to classify texts as either positive or 
negative (Pang, Lee, 2004; Mullen, Collier, 2004). The approaches are known to be effective 
but also of limited use in areas where a high precision of results is needed. On the other hand, 
more elaborate approaches use linguistic resources in order to identify (1) expressions 
indicating opinions, (2) the polarity of the detected expressions as well as (3) the entity or 
topic to which the opinion refers. Typical examples of such systems are the ones developed 
by the CELI group (Dini, Mazzini, 2002) which analyzes customer opinions about mobile 
phones and identifies the polarity of opinions about specific parts or functions as well as the 
Sentiment Analyzer of IBM and the University of Texas (Yi et al., 2003) which extracts 
opinions about a given subject from online documents. However, obtaining a more fine-
grained classification of opinions in terms of both granularity and specificity would be of 
much interest for many companies or agencies. For instance, within the DeepThought project 
experiments were carried out in which the CELI approach was extended by integrating deeper 
processing steps involving HPSG (Beermann et al., 2004). In this way more specific 
information concerning topics or the causes that brought about a particular judgment could be 
identified.  
In this paper we present an issues monitoring system which performs a fine-grained analysis 
and classification of sentiments related to user-specific topics or aspects of them. The aim of 
our approach is to establish not only the polarity of the sentiments towards a specific topic 
identified in the text - as done in the above mentioned systems - but also to identify the 
                                                 
1 SentA: Sentiment Analysis 
Sentiment Analysis for Issues Monitoring Using Linguistic Resources 
degree of positive or negative orientation as well as quantify the degree of emotional 
implication carried by sentiment expressions. To this end, the system makes use of various 
linguistic resources. Thesauri, lexicons and specific patterns are used to identify topics in 
German online texts, detect sentiment expressions, establish sentiment orientation and 
strength of emotional involvement, as well as associate the detected sentiment expressions to 
the established topics.  
In the following section we describe the issues monitoring system: we present its architecture, 
the resources used during the monitoring process, and illustrate its way of functioning by 
means of an example. Then, in Section 3, we focus on the various steps involved in the 
sentiment analysis with SentA, whereas in Section 4 we present an experiment carried out to 
evaluate the sentiment analysis process and discuss the results. Finally, we present our 
conclusions and point to future work. 
2 The Issues Monitoring System 
2.1 Architecture and Resources 
In order to perform a fine-grained analysis and classification of sentiments related to user-
specific topics, we have adapted an automatic indexing tool described in (Ripplinger, 
Schmidt, 2001). The modified architecture is shown in Figure 1.  
Online news Newsgroup postings
Crawler
Lexicons SentimentLexicon
Text categorization Sentiment analysis Text-DB with SentA
Thesauri Sentiment
Visualization Pattern DB
Alerting
Figure 1 : Architecture of the issues monitoring system 
The crawler downloads hourly news articles and newsgroup postings from specific websites. 
Then, in order to classify the retrieved texts, the input undergoes linguistic processing. The 
first step consists in the morphological analysis of the input with the package MPRO (Maas, 
1996). It involves lemmatization, part-of-speech tagging and homograph analysis. 
Monolingual lexicons are used in order to assign information concerning word class, semantic 
Ecaterina Rascu, Kai Schirmer and Johann Haller 
features, as well as derivation or decomposition in case of compound words. Then, shallow 
parsing is carried out to disambiguate the input and identify multiword terms and their 
respective variants. Eventually, a list of descriptors defining the topic of the text or aspects of 
it is generated by statistically evaluating the semantic load of the text and by weighing this 
information against a thesaurus. At this stage the text is classified using either a classification 
scheme provided by the user or the predefined codes assigned to terms in the lexicon 
(Ripplinger, Schmidt, 2001).  
The next processing step is the analysis of the sentiments expressed in the input texts with 
SentA. Two types of resources are involved in this process. The first one is a sentiment 
lexicon in which expressions are encoded together with a manually assigned sentiment 
orientation. In some entries word stems are fully specified whereas in others regular 
expressions are used in order to ensure a broader coverage. The second resource is a 
sentiment pattern database including an ordered set of typical patterns involving sentiment 
expressions. Such patterns are used to establish if the sentiment orientation of an expression 
has been changed by certain features revealed during the analysis or by the immediate 
context. As will be shown in Section 3.2, sentiment orientation might be reinforced, 
attenuated, or even reversed depending on the context. Moreover, specific patterns are used to 
associate sentiment expressions either to the main topic or to aspects of it.  
The last step is visualizing the analysis results. The sentiment values are cumulated for each 
user-specific issue. On the basis of such information, the issues monitoring system is able to 
show the development of attitudes or opinions towards a specific subject for a given period of 
time. The charts in Figure 2 show the results of the categorization and sentiment analysis 
processes. The chart on the left hand side (LHS) presents the three most negative issues over 
an interval of seven days (7 Tage) in online news. In the case shown here the three issues are 
Sicherheit (safety), Pünktlichkeit (punctuality), and Mehdorn, who is the chairman of the 
executive board at the German railway company Deutsche Bahn. The y-axis shows the 
sentiment value from neutral (neut) to negative (neg) on the LHS whereas on the right hand 
side (RHS) the same values are visualized through the changing colours of the column from 
yellow (neutral) to red (negative). A dot at the end of a line in the chart represents the position 
of an issue during the current week while the other end indicates the position of the same 
issue the week before. The x-axis shows the media presence value (Medienpräsenz) of an 
issue. This value is calculated by taking into account the length of the articles relevant for that 
issue and specific website frequency scores. The more an issue is located at the RHS the more 
spread it is among the public. The chart on the RHS illustrates the development of an issue, 
i.e. railway (Bahn) over a period of 12 months. The y-axis shows media presence values on 
the LHS as well as negative sentiment values with colours changing from yellow (neutral) to 
red (negative) on the RHS. The x-axis shows the 12-month time period2. 
                                                 
2 Since the system has been in use only since October, the RHS chart does not contain any information for the 
previous months.    
Sentiment Analysis for Issues Monitoring Using Linguistic Resources 
 
Figure 2 : Visualizing the results of the categorization and sentiment analysis processes 
2.2 Example 
Example (1)3 illustrates the text categorization and the sentiment analysis processes for a 
given sentence. As described in Section 2.1 the descriptors Fernverkehr (long distance 
traffic), Nahverkehr (short distance traffic), and Preis (price) are computed as being relevant 
to the main topic of the text. In the field Oberbegriff (Hyperonym), the hyperonyms of these 
descriptors are listed. Hyperonym information as well as the data concerning general 
categorization schemes listed in the Special Field are encoded in the thesaurus. 
1. Die Preise im Fernverkehr sind seit Sonntag um 3,1 Prozent, im Nahverkehr sogar 
um durchschnittlich 3,6 Prozent teurer. 
(Ticket prices in long distance traffic increased by 3.1 percent, in short distance 
traffic actually by an average of 3.6 percent.) 
 
Descriptors:  Fernverkehr[100]; Nahverkehr[100]; Preis[50]; 
Special Field:  n6021 (Personenbeförderung)[100]; n6000 (Landverkehr)[100]; 
Oberbegriff:  Verkehr[100]; Preis[50]; 
Opinions:   {ori=teurer,opinion=S-1+2,desc=fernverkehr;nahverkehr} 
The field Opinions contains the results of the sentiment analysis process. The sentiment 
expression teurer (more expensive) is assigned a semantic orientation value (opinion=S-1+2) 
and is associated with the descriptors Fernverkehr and Nahverkehr (desc=fernverkehr; 
nahverkehr). Section 3 provides a more detailed description of the sentiment analysis process. 
                                                 
3In order to keep explanations simple, only those aspects of the output are presented that are relevant for our 
paper. In all examples the results of the sentiment analysis are given in form of attribute-value pairs grouped 
in a feature bundle. The attributes used for illustration have the following meaning: ori – surface form of the 
input word, opinion –  sentiment orientation, desc – descriptor.  
Ecaterina Rascu, Kai Schirmer and Johann Haller 
3 Sentiment Analysis with SentA 
In this section we describe the various steps involved in sentiment analysis and illustrate them 
with examples. The first step of the analysis is the matching of the sentiment lexicon against 
an input text (cf. Section 3.1). Secondly, the patterns concerning change in sentiment degree 
are applied in order to identify contexts reinforcing or attenuating sentiments (cf. Section 
3.2). In a third step negation patterns, which are used to discover contexts that change the 
polarity of sentiment orientation, are considered. Eventually those patterns are applied that try 
to associate the discovered sentiment expressions to the main topic or to one of the aspects of 
a topic identified in the analyzed text.  
3.1 Lexical Matching 
When matching the sentiment lexicon against the input text, the sentiment expressions 
detected in the text are associated with the corresponding sentiment orientation values found 
in the lexicon. In Example (2) the verb hofft (hopes) is identified as sentiment expression and 
associated with the sentiment orientation value S+1+2 (opinion=S+1+2). The sentiment 
orientation value involves two dimensions: the first dimension is the degree of positive or 
negative orientation measured on a scale from -6 to +6; the second one quantifies the degree 
of emotional implication on a scale from 0 to +6. The latter dimension was introduced in 
order to quantify how strong the preference or aversion towards a specific topic is. In our 
example these two dimensions are: +1, indicating a slightly positive orientation, respectively 
+2, marking a somewhat increased emotional involvement.  
2. Jetzt hofft die Bahn AG auf Verkehrszuwachs. 
(The Bahn AG hopes that traffic will increase) 
{expression=hofft, opinion=S+1+2,desc=bahn} 
3.2 Pattern Matching 
Pattern matching in SentA serves various purposes. After identifying sentiment expressions 
in input texts, SentA examines if the marked items are actually relevant for sentiment 
analysis. For example specific patterns are used to identify and filter out items that appear in 
questions or in the vicinity of particular structures. Then, typical patterns are applied in order 
to determine if the orientation of the detected sentiment expressions has been altered. We 
consider two categories of patterns to detect such cases: degree patterns and negation patterns. 
A third category of patterns called topic-relevant sentiment patterns is used in order to 
determine possible associations of a sentiment expression with one or several descriptors. The 
patterns are implemented in KURD4, a flat pattern matching formalism (Carl & Schmidt-
Wigger, 1998). 
Degree Patterns  
                                                 
4 KURD is an acronym representing the first letters of the basic actions of the formalism : Kill, Unify, Replace, 
Delete. 
Sentiment Analysis for Issues Monitoring Using Linguistic Resources 
Degree patterns are used to establish if the sentiment orientation value of an expression has 
been reinforced or attenuated. In certain cases the meaning of a sentiment expression is 
modified through specific features such as the use of the comparative or the superlative 
degree in case of adjectives or adverbs. Context may also have such an influence on meaning. 
In (3) for example, the negative meaning of the noun Protest is reinforced through the use of 
the modifying adjective heftig (fierce).  
3. Dies führte zu heftigen Protesten. 
(This lead to fierce protests.) 
{ori=Protesten,opinion=S-4+3}. 
Specific patterns relying both on morphological and contextual information have been 
implemented in SentA in order to recognize such contexts and adjust the value of the 
sentiment orientation feature accordingly. In (3) the original sentiment orientation of the word 
Protest, opinion=S-2+2, is augmented to opinion=S-4+3. After detecting contexts of 
sentiment reinforcement or attenuation, the next step in the sentiment analysis process is 
applied. 
Negation Patterns 
Negation within an utterance changes the semantic orientation of sentiment expressions. 
Therefore, negation patterns are applied to the modified input, in order to detect negation 
markers and adjust the semantic orientation of the corresponding sentiment expressions 
accordingly. In (4) the semantic orientation of the adjective zufrieden (satisfied) is changed 
from S+1+1 to S-1+0 under the influence of the detected negative marker nicht.  
4. “Wir werden uns damit nicht zufrieden geben”, so Kohl. 
(“We won’t be satisfied with that”, said Kohl) 
{ori=zufrieden,opinion=S-1+0} 
Topic-Relevant Sentiment Patterns 
Once the sentiment orientation value of an expression has been established, SentA tries to 
associate the identified sentiment expression to the corresponding topic or issue. In Section 2 
we mentioned that during the text categorization process, so-called descriptors, indicators of 
the topic or of its aspects, are computed. The topic–relevant sentiment patterns try to 
associate these descriptors to the sentiment expressions marked in the text. Some of these 
patterns are linguistically motivated. However, when no linguistically motivated pattern 
applies and the utterance contains both descriptors and sentiment expressions, other patterns 
relying on information concerning general sentence structure or vicinity try to associate them. 
As shown in examples (2) and (5) the base form of the descriptors detected in the sentence are 
assigned as values to the attribute desc.  
5. Die Preise im Fernverkehr sind seit Sonntag um 3,1 Prozent, im Nahverkehr sogar um 
durchschnittlich 3,6 Prozent teurer. 
(Ticket prices in long distance traffic increased by 3.1 Percent, in short distance traffic 
actually by an average of 3.6 Percent.) 
{ori=teurer,opinion=S-2+3,desc=fernverkehr;nahverkehr} 
Ecaterina Rascu, Kai Schirmer and Johann Haller 
In case of example (2) the association of the descriptor Bahn to the sentiment expression hofft 
was motivated by a linguistic pattern, i.e. a verb expressing sentiments is likely to refer to the 
grammatical subject of the sentence. On the other hand, in (5), patterns relying on information 
concerning coordination and sentence structure in general are used to associate the 
predicatively used adjective teuer to the descriptors Fernverkehr and Nahverkehr. 
In the next section we evaluate the overall performance of SentA. Besides, the reliability of 
the various resources involved in the sentiment analysis process is tested. 
4 Evaluation of SentA 
For the evaluation of the system we used two classes of texts dealing with the German 
Railway Company Deutsche Bahn. The first category, henceforth Bahn-News, consists of 25 
news texts automatically retrieved by the issues monitoring system from the internet. The 
second category of texts, Bahn-Group, includes 25 texts retrieved from various newsgroups 
on the net.  
We established gold standards by manually annotating the text segments expressing opinions 
in all texts. Besides identifying the sentiment expressions (SE) in the test texts, the manual 
annotation also includes information concerning degree of sentiment orientation (D), negation 
(N) and the association of sentiment expression to particular topic descriptors (SE-TD). The 
following figure summarizes the characteristics of the two text classes.  
Text class Texts Sentences Words SE D N SE-TD
Bahn-News 25 484 8420 266 39 15 148 
Bahn-Group 25 183 2863 160 15 6 59 
Figure 3 : Characteristics of the test texts 
We used the Bahn-News texts to tune our system to the specific topic railway. During tuning 
we extended the sentiment lexicon and the sentiment template database in order to cover as 
many sentiment expressions and typical patterns found in the Bahn-News texts as possible. 
Then, we compared the gold standards for both text classes with the automatic annotation of 
the test texts and computed precision and recall (cf. Figure 4) for detecting sentiment 
expressions and the corresponding sentiment orientation values. The association of sentiment 
expression to topic descriptors was evaluated at a later stage (cf. Figure 5). 
Text class Recall Precision 
Bahn-News 99% 97% 
Bahn-Group 75% 92% 
Figure 4 : Recall and precision values for the test texts 
Sentiment Analysis for Issues Monitoring Using Linguistic Resources 
As expected, recall and precision for the Bahn-News texts are very high. Precision in case of 
the Bahn-Group texts is fairly high whereas recall is considerably lower than for the Bahn-
News texts. Decrease in recall is mainly due to sentiment expressions that are not covered in 
the sentiment lexicon. Many of these expressions are rather colloquial and thus more typical 
to newsgroup postings than to the online articles on which the system was trained. Other 
missing sentiment expressions as einfach (simple) are ambiguous and can be used with 
different polarity depending on the context.  
Figure 5 presents recall and precision values for all the resources involved in the sentiment 
analysis process considered independently. For all resources both recall and precision values 
for the Bahn-Group texts decrease. Decrease in recall is mainly due to sentiment expressions 
or patterns not yet covered in the resources. Precision in case of the degree and negation 
patterns is relatively high, 88% respectively 80%. However the number of such patterns 
detected in the test texts is too low to attempt any kind of generalization at the moment.  
 SE D N SE-TD 
Text class Recall Precision Recall Precision Recall Precision Recall Precision 
Bahn-News 99% 97% 97% 97% 93% 100% 82% 61% 
Bahn-Group 75% 92% 88% 88% 67% 80% 64% 57% 
Figure 5 : Recall and precision values SE, D, N, und SE-TD 
As shown in Figure 5 recall and precision values in case of the topic relevant sentiment 
patterns are quite low. In many cases, templates based on vicinity information lead to wrong 
associations which could be avoided by implementing more templates that are linguistically 
motivated.  
5 Conclusions and Outlook 
In this paper we described an issues monitoring system which uses linguistic resources to 
perform a fine-grained analysis and classification of sentiments related to user-specific topics. 
The evaluation of the sentiment analysis component shows that the performance of SentA can 
be compared to that of the CELI system (Dini, Mazzini, 2002) and Sentiment Analyzer (Yi 
et al., 2003). Even though a direct comparison of the approaches is not possible due to the 
differences in the technical approach, development, test corpora or covered patterns, figures 
show that the overall precision for the Bahn-Group texts (92%) is comparable to the values 
obtained with the CELI system (92%) and the Sentiment Analyzer (87%). Recall with 
SentA is, however, higher: 75% vs. 52% with the CELI system and 56% with Sentiment 
Analyzer. The evaluation also shows that the patterns associating sentiment expressions to 
the main topic of a text or to its various aspects need to be further refined. This seems to be a 
major problem in the CELI approach, too (Beermann et al., 2004). The experiment reported in 
(Beermann et al., 2004) showed that by integrating deep analysis with HPSG inappropriate 
sentiment expression – topic associations could be filtered out and thus noise could be 
reduced. However, the fact that recall could not be increased and the relatively high 
percentage of non-parsed text units (27%) along with longer processing times required by 
Ecaterina Rascu, Kai Schirmer and Johann Haller 
deep analysis in general raises the question if deep analysis is the appropriate technique to be 
used to increase the overall efficiency of an issues monitoring system. Therefore, future work 
on SentA will rather concentrate on further refining the resources used for shallow 
processing, more specifically on the implementation of further linguistically motivated 
templates for the assignment of sentiment expressions to specific topics. Moreover, topic 
association needs to be extended to the text level and therefore, such phenomena as anaphora 
resolution or ellipsis must be addressed. 
References 
BEERMANN D., ought/downloads_pubEREID P, HELLAN L., GONELLA D., KURZ D., 
MAZZINI G., PLAEHN O., SIEGEL M. (2004). DeepThought - Hybrid Deep and Shallow 
Methods for Knowledge-Intensive Information Extraction (IST-2001-37836). D5.10. 
Evaluation report on efficiency, accuracy and usability of the new approach.  
http://www.eurice.de/deepthought/downloads_public/D5.10.pdf.  
CARL M., SCHMIDT-WIGGER A. (1998). Shallow Post Morphological Processing with KURD. 
In Proceedings of the Conference on New Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
NeMLaP'98, Sydney. 
DINI L., MAZZINI G. (2002), Opinion Classification through Information Extraction, In 
ZANASI A., BREBBIA C.A., EBECKEN N.F.F., MELLI P. (eds.), Data Mining III, WIT Press, 
Southampton.  
MAAS H.-D. (1996). MPRO-Ein System zur Analyse und Synthese deutscher Wörter, In 
HAUSSER, R. (ed). Linguistische Verifikation Sprache und Information, Max Niemeyer 
Verlag, Tübingen. 
MULLEN T., COLLIER N. (2004), Sentiment Analysis using Support Vector Machines with 
Diverse Information Sources, In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2004. 
PANG B., LEE L. (2004), A Sentimental Education: Sentiment Analysis Using Subjectivity 
Summarization Based on Minimum Cuts, In Proceedings of the ACM 2004. 
RIPPLINGER B., SCHMIDT P. (2001), AUTINDEX: an automatic multilingual indexing system, 
In Proceedings of the 24th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and 
development in information retrieval. 
YI J., NASUKAWA T., BUNESCU R., NIBLACK W. (2003), Sentiment Analyzer: Extracting 
Sentiments about a Given Topic using Natural Language Processing Technolgies, In 
Proceedings of the Third IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). 
