Conférence TALN 1999, Cargèse, 12-17 juillet 1999
Achievements vs. Accomplishments : A Computational
Treatment of Atomicity, Incrementality, and Perhaps of
Event Structure
Patrick Caudal
TALANA, UFR de Linguistique, Université Paris 7, Case 7003
2, place Jussieu, 75251 Paris Cedex 05
caudal@linguist.jussieu.fr
http://talana.linguist.jussieu.fr/~caudal/
Abstract
Achievements and accomplishments are argued in this paper to differ w.r.t. atomicity (rather
than punctuality), a notion strongly but not exclusively related to incrementality, i.e., to event-
object mapping functions ; the latter will be shown to be unsufficient to account for certain
cases of non-atomicity. A computational treatment of incrementality and atomicity will be
presented, and a number of related empirical problems considered, notably lexical polysemy
in verb – argument relationships. Finally, the approach will be shown to be extendable to the
notion of telicity, opening the way to a broader treatment of event structure.
1. Introduction
The punctuality of achievements vs. non-punctuality of accomplishments has been the
object of many theoretical contests ever since those event types were introduced in Vendler’s
seminal 1957 paper. I will demonstrate here that punctuality breaks up into two, distinct
notions, namely non-durativity and atomicity, before arguing for a compositional semantic
account of the latter. I will show that (non-)atomicity interacts closely but not exclusively
with the notion of incrementality, as formulated in Dowty (1991), and that this property of
verbs should be lexically encoded. I will finally discuss some means for an NLP system to
represent and calculate atomicity and incrementality, before proposing a formal treatment for
a number of cases of lexical polysemy having an impact on them.

1. Achievements vs. accomplishments - from punctuality to atomicity
Vendler (1957) claimed that achievements and accomplishments are respectively punctual
and durative. He noted that at <time expression> adverbials combine with achievements but
not accomplishments, whereas finish combines with accomplishments but not achievements :

(1a)   At what time did you reach the top? At noon sharp.             (achievement)
(1b)   At what moment did you spot the plane? At 10:53 A.M.           (achievement)
(2a)   *Yannig finished leaving.                                      (achievement)
(2b)   Yannig finished drawing the circle.                            (accomplishment)
Dowty (1986) and Moens and Steedman (1988) questioned the coherence of the class of
achievements, underlining the fact that not all of them are non-durative. As indicated above,
Vendler identifies punctual events through the conjunction of the (positive) at and (negative)
finish test. But they sometimes yield conflicting results :

Patrick Caudal

(3a)     Karpov bet Kasparov at 10.00 P.M.
(3b)     *The Allies beat Germany at 10.00 P.M.
(3c)     *Karpov finished beating Kasparov/the Allies finished beating Germany.
According to the at test, (3b) does not qualify as an achievement because it is durative,
whereas (3a) passes this very test and is therefore non-durative. Contrariwise, the finish test in
(3c) yields identical results for both events. The latter test is therefore unrelated to
(non-)durativity, unlike the at test, which refuses durative events. It also follows from this fact
that telic events such as (3b) fall outside Vendler’s classification, since they fail both the
finish test (unlike accomplishments) AND the at test (unlike achievements). If we assume that
events such as (3b) are to be classified as achievements, non-durativity should not be
considered a necessary property of this type of event. The salient common point between (3a)
and (3b) is that both events lack proper subparts, i.e., are atomic. Atomicity should thus be
regarded as the defining property of achievements. It can be tested with finishi.

2. Why atomicity is also a semantic category
Verkuyl (1993), Jackendoff (1996) and many others argue that atomicity is primarily a
matter of pragmatic constraints. The following examples illustrate one such pragmatic
constraint on atomicity, i.e., the relative size of arguments of verbs of consumption :

(4a)     ??John finished eating the blackcurrant berry.
(4b)     The bird finished eating the blackcurrant berry.
Blackcurrant berries are so small with respect to a human ‘eater’ that eat denotes an atomic
event in (4a), while the same does not hold true of birds (cf. (4b)). Yet I will demonstrate here
that atomicity should receive a semantic (and aspectual) dimension. Consider (5) and (6) ii :

(5a)     ??The soldier finished crossing the border.
(5b)     The soldiers finished crossing the border.
(6a)     ??John finished slamming the door open.
(6b)     John finished slamming the doors open.
The plural NPs the soldiers and the doors possess subparts, along which the crossing and
slamming events in (5b) and (6b) are measured, making those events non-atomic (there are
several distinct subevents of one door being slammed, and of one soldier crossing the
border) ; compare with the atomic (5a) and (6a), where those very NPs are singular. The
singular / plural variation being a semantic one, atomicity is a semantic categoryiii. Moreover,
atomic events are not compatible with the progressive perfect, whereas non-atomic ones
freely combine with it, a fact which also militates for a semantic view of atomicity (cf. (7)).

(7a)     *The soldier has been crossing the border. (OK if iterative, i.e., not atomic)
(7b)     The soldiers have been crossing the border.

3. Towards a semantic account of (non-) atomicity and incrementality
The above data suggests that atomicity is related to the notion of incrementality, which
Dowty (1991) first formulated. To my knowledge, this notion (which was originally coined to

i
I will not discuss other possible tests here for want of space. But note that ‘duration’ phrases in French (Ca fait
<duration> que P or P depuis <duration>), which combines with a non-atomic event OR a durative atomic
event, and stop/arrêter, which combine with a non-atomic event, can be used as complementary tests.
ii
Similar examples were proposed by Declerck (1979), but they were only discussed in terms of durativity.
iii
See Caudal (1998a) for more evidence of the semantic dimension of atomicity, in relation to collective nouns.

Achievements vs. Accomplishments

study telicity) has never been discussed in relation to atomicity, although this is an obvious
thing to do, since both focus on (sub)event structure. I will undertake to bridge this gap here.

3. 1. Incrementality and delimiting arguments
Dowty defines incrementality as a property of verbs whose development can be mapped
onto the internal structure of one of their arguments (which he calls an incremental theme) :

(8)     John drank his glass of beer.
In (8), the drinking event is measured along the subparts of the reference of his glass of
beer, its incremental theme ; it is mapped onto them through a structure preserving function,
i.e., an event-object homomorphism - cf. Dowty (1991) and Krifka (1992). Incrementality
raises an interesting problem w.r.t. to atomicity, since Dowty (1991) rejects ostensibly the
possibility to treat as incremental themes the patient arguments of so-called achievements
verbs, arguing that incremental themes should be able to undergo a gradual change-of-stateiv.
Unfortunately, Dowty does not consider examples such as (6b), which exhibit an incremental
behaviour although they include this very kind of patient argument. I will therefore reject
Dowty’s objection, and regard (6b) as incremental.

It also follows from the above definition that incrementality entails non-atomicity : it
implies that an event’s development possesses proper subparts, and therefore that it is non-
atomic. But does non-atomicity entail incrementality, conversely ? I.e., are those two notions
equivalent ? If not, how is their relationship to be explained ? In order to answer those
questions, I will make use of a feature-based notation in the following sections : [+/-ATM]
will express atomicity/non-atomicity, and [+/-INC] incrementality/non-incrementality.

3. 2. Non-atomicity with incrementality
Let us call delimiting arguments the arguments of a verb measuring-out the development
of an associated event (e.g., the internal arguments of drink or slam open). This notion is
substantially broader than that of incremental theme, since it includes e.g., patient arguments
of so-called punctual verbs, which Dowty refused to regard as incremental themes. For the
sake of simplicity, I will restrict the argumentation below to internal delimiting arguments :

(9a)    Yannig finished eating his pancake.
(9b)    Yannig finished eating his pancakes.
(10a) *Yannig finished picking up his book.
(10b) Yannig finished picking up his books.
(9) shows that eat can be [-ATM],[+INC] both with a definite singular and plural
delimiting argument, whereas (10) shows that pick up can be [-ATM],[+INC] only with a
definite plural delimiting argument. The development of eating his pancake is measured in
(9a) along the quantity of pancake remaining to eat, whereas that of picking up his books in
(10b) is measured along the successive individual books being collected. I will extend the
notion of incrementality to this latter kind of event-object mapping.

Under this view, incremental readings involve delimiting arguments in general, rather than
mere incremental themes. However, I will oppose two types of incrementality, thus
introducing a distinction between Dowty’s incrementality and the extension I proposed. I will
iv
Cf. Dowty (1991:568) : Many traditional Themes…are not Incremental Themes. Many achievement verbs
entail a definite change of state in one of their arguments…but never in distinguishable separate…subevents.

Patrick Caudal

call m-incrementality (for quantity of matter-incrementality) the type of incrementality
exhibited by (9a) and i-incrementality (for individual-incrementality) that exhibited by (10b).
At least two classes of verbs can be distinguished in this respect : verbs like eat are capable of
m-incrementality, i.e., with individual-referring delimiting arguments (they have incremental
themes à la Dowty), whereas verbs like pick up are only capable of i-incrementality, i.e., with
collection-referring delimiting arguments (they lack incremental themes à la Dowty). Of
course, non-atomicity can follow from either i-incrementality or m-incrementality.

Path-movement verbs illustrate another type of incremental non-atomic events :

(11)    Mary walked the Appalachian trail. (Tenny (1994))
The development of (11) is mapped onto the explicit path argument the Appalachian trail in
(11). It is therefore [-ATM],[+INC]. White (1994) proposed a generalized path-based
incremental theme role to account for the semantic behaviour of both patient and path
delimiting arguments, fairly akin to the present one, since it crucially relies on a similar
individual / quantity of matter distinction. One could conclude at this point that the present
account of incrementality is sufficient to predict (non-)atomicity, and that indeed non-
atomicity and incrementality are equivalent notions. If that is right, then all types of non-
atomic events should be incremental. However, I will show in 3.3 that it is not the case.

3. 3. Non-atomicity without incrementality
As a matter of act, some non-atomic events lack a delimiting argument. The type of non-
atomicity involved cannot therefore be related to ‘standard’ incrementality :

(12)    John finished digesting his pudding.
(13)    John finished cooking the chicken.
(14)    John finished registering his son at the university.
Contrary to (9a/b) and (10b) , neither (12) nor (13) nor (14) are (necessarily) measured
along the subparts of their patient argument. His pudding, the chicken and his son do not
behave like delimiting arguments, and those non-atomic events are non-incremental
([-ATM],[-INC]). Some other theoretical device is required to account for such data.

I will claim that digest and cook receive a scalar result state, i.e., one that varies through
time : John’s chicken becomes (as a whole) closer to being (finally) cooked as time passes in
(13), and John’s pudding gradually turns (as a whole, and not bit by bit ; it is therefore a non-
incremental event) into nutriments inside his stomach in (12) (see Caudal (1998b) for further
details). I will refer to such gradual, non-incremental events as scalar eventsv. Register in (14)
behaves differently, as it does not involve a scalar result state. Its development rather seems to
consist in a series of pragmatically determined registration stages, rather than semantically
determined subevents. I will refer to this kind of data as gradual scenario eventsvi.

I will now turn to the treatment of incremental non-atomic events (section 4), before
proposing one for non-incremental non-atomic events (section 5).

v
It should be noted that scalar events are a productive, non-closed class, since they include resultative
constructions (e.g., pound the metal flat ; see Levin and Rappaport 1995). It is therefore important for any NLP
system or theory to deal with them in a satisfying manner.
vi
Note that contrary to scalar events and incremental events, ‘gradual scenario’ events do not combine with the
progressive perfect, cf. *John has been registering his son at the university, nor with stop. Those facts suggest
that they should not be regarded as ‘true’ non-atomic events, and that their development has very specific
properties. See also the arrêter and depuis tests in French, which refuse ‘gradual scenario’ events, cf. *Jean
arrêta d’inscrire son fils à la fac and ??Jean inscrit son fils à la fac depuis deux jours.

Achievements vs. Accomplishments

4. A formal and computational treatment of incremental non-atomic events
I will now put forth a formal and computational treatment of incremental non-atomic
events, relying on model-theoretic logics and on the Generative Lexicon framework (GL ; see
Pustejovsky 1995). I will first discuss a few theoretical notions related to the internal
structure of objects and events, in order to formalize m- and i-incrementality. I will leave
aside the treatment of path-movement verbs, referring the interested reader to White (1994).

4. 1. Internal structure of objects and events : Link’s part-of operators
Following Link (1983), I will oppose individuals (i.e., the denotata of nouns referring to
individual entities) and collections (i.e., the denotata of definite plural NPs, collectives, etc. ;
see Caudal 1998a). Let A be the domain of entities (events or objects), structured as a semi-
lattice. Let individual_part_of be a partial order relation on individual entities (henceforth i-
part or ≤i), connecting an individual to the collection it belongs to. Let 7i be the join
operation on individuals and collections, y a collection and x an individual, such that x is an i-
part of y. The definition of the meronymic operator ≤i was formulated by Link as follows :
(15)   ∀x,y [x ≤i y → x 7i y = y]
Following again G. Link, I will define similarly a partial order relation on non-individual
parts, m-part (or ≤m), which connects an individual and its non-individual parts (e.g., a slab of
stone to a rock). All those operators will apply both to events and objects in the model (events
being reified). As a consequence, collection-referring NPs as well as i-incremental events
possess i-parts, whereas individual-referring NPs and m-incremental events have m-parts. Let
us turn now to the lexical component of our atomicity/incrementality construal procedure.

4. 2. Encoding incrementality within the Generative Lexicon framework
I will argue that incrementality depends both on lexical information and structural
composition. Whether events will receive (or not) an incremental reading is determined in fine
at the structural level, depending on the interaction of a verb with the internal structure of its
delimiting arguments. I will propose here to encode lexically m-incrementality / i-
incrementality, although any potentially incremental verb can receive an i-incremental
reading (but recall that not all verbs can be read incrementally). In the spirit of Krifka’s
object-event mapping functions (see Krifka 1992), I will assume an i-inc aspectual role
function relating the i-parts of an argument to the development of an event (causing it to
become i-incremental with an appropriate delimiting argument), and a m-inc aspectual role
function relating the m-parts of an argument to the development of an event (causing it to
become m-incremental with an appropriate delimiting argument). The following event/object
mapping predicate MAP-I can be derived from Krifka’s MAP-O/E (mapping to
objects/events) predicates (see Krifka 1992:39) by replacing his standard partial order
operator with ≤i :
(16)   MAP-I : ∀R[MAP-I(R) ↔ MAP-Ei (R) ∧ MAP-Oi (R)]
∀R[MAP-Ei (R) ↔ ∀e,x,x’ [R(x,e) ∧ x’≤i x → ∃e’ [e’ ≤i e ∧ R(x’,e’)]]]
∀R[MAP-Oi (R) ↔ ∀e,e’,x [R(x,e) ∧ e’≤i e → ∃x’ [ x’≤i x ∧ R(x’,e’)]]]
Let the model stipulate that MAP-I can only be applied to the i-inc aspectual-role. A
similar formulation can be given for a MAP-M predicate applying only to the m-incremental
aspectual role m-inc (replace ≤i with ≤m in (16)). Thus, by combining Link’s part-of operators
with Krifka’s event-object mapping functions, atomicity construal functions can be proposed.
Finally, GL will provide us with the proper computational lexical machinery in which to

Patrick Caudal

insert those functions. I will encode the necessary aspectual role functions in the EVENTSTR
feature and AGENTIVE qualia role, as the following entries for pick up and eat show :
(17)                                                      (18)
pick-up                                                   eat
EVENTSTR =     E1 = 1 e1:pick_act(e1,x,y),                EVENTSTR =      E1 = 1 e1:eat_act(e1,x,y),
i-inc(y,e1)                                                m-inc(y,e1)
E2 = e2:RStage(e2,y)                                       E2 = e2:RStage(e2,y)

ARGSTR =       ARG1 = x:ind                               ARGSTR =        ARG1 = x:ind
ARG2 = y:ind                                               ARG2 = y:ind

QUALIA =       AGENTIVE = 1                               QUALIA =        AGENTIVE = 1
Note that the RStage predicates above refer to result states (RS). The aspectual role functions
i/m-inc(x,e) relate the internal structures of an argument x and a (sub)event e to one another.
They will determine whether e will be atomic or non-atomic : if x possesses proper subparts,
then i/m-inc(x,e) implies that e will also receive subparts, and will therefore be non-atomic.
The whole point remains that incrementality is lexically licensed but structurally construed.

5. Atomicity, incrementality and aspectual polysemy within GL
I will study in this section cases of lexical polysemy interfering with the incrementality
functions defined above. I will assume the reader to be familiar with qualia structure and
related formal operations (e.g., type coercion and co-composition ; cf. Pustejovsky 1995).
5.1. Lexical polysemy and the internal structure of delimiting arguments
Many implicitly relational nouns exhibit in context a polysemous internal structure.
Individual-referring nouns can thus also refer to collections, as in the following French data :

(19a) Yannig a fini de ranger sa chambre.
Yannig finished tidying up his room.
(19b) *Yannig a fini de ranger son livre.vii
Yannig finished putting away his book.
Ranger receives an incremental reading in (19a), and a non-incremental one in (19b). In fact,
it should be lexically encoded as capable of i-incrementality. Since a room is not a movable
entity, a type mismatch arises between ranger and the FORMAL role of chambre. However,
chambre receives a collective interpretation in (19a) by coercion (i.e., it refers to the movable
objects a room contains, the coercion operation using a ‘type-pumping’ device to extract the
movable_obj type from the CONST of chambre ; cf. Pustejovsky and Bouillon 1995). See
Caudal (1998a) for a treatment within GL of the related polysemy of collective nouns (e.g.,
orchestra and forest), which can refer to either individuals or collections.

5.2. Quasi ‘light’ verbs, co-composition and variations in incrementality
It is also necessary to account for a number of cases of variation in the type of
incrementality involved, originating in the interaction between verbs and their arguments.
Many of them could be treated in terms of co-compostionviii within GL :

vii
According to my own judgement, and contrary to what an anonymous reviewer suggested, (19b) remains odd
even in the context of a large library. And anyway, if it were not, it would be a ‘gradual scenario’ event, not a
truly non-atomic one, cf. : ??Yannig range son livre depuis dix minutes. and *Yannig arrêta de ranger son livre.
viii
Co-composition refers to cases of lexical polysemy in which a lexical item receives a ‘new’ sense (i.e., one
not lexicalized) through the contribution of another lexical item with which it combines. See Pustejovsky (1995).

Achievements vs. Accomplishments

(20a) *Le moteur acheva de produire un bruit étrange.
The engine finished emitting a strange noise.
(20b) Yannig acheva de produire son premier article.
Yannig finished writing his first paper.
The French verb produire yields an i-incremental reading in (20a), vs. a m-incremental
reading in (20b). Arguably, produire means ‘to cause to come into existence’, and therefore
makes use of the content of the AGENTIVE qualia role (i.e., the qualia role indicating how a
type is brought into existence) of its internal argument to determine the corresponding
‘creation’ event. The AGENTIVE roles of bruit and article can be represented as follows :
(21)                                              (22)
bruit                                             article
ARGSTR = ARG1 = x:sound                           ARGSTR = ARG1 = x:info
QUALIA = AGENTIVE = noise_act(e,y,x),             QUALIA= AGENTIVE = write_act(e,y,x),
i-inc(e,x)                                      m-inc(e,x)
As a result of the co-composition operation, the AGENTIVE of produire unifies with that of
bruit and article. It receives therefore different event structures and incrementality functions :
in the case of article in (22), it contains an m-incremental event, and in the case of bruit in
(21), an i-incremental event. Produire can be regarded as a quasi ‘light’, functionally
dependent verb, since it has an underspecified AGENTIVE qualia role, so that its event
structure and incrementality functions are also underspecified. The necessary information is
contributed co-compositionally by the AGENTIVE of one of its arguments.
Similar variations on incrementality can also be triggered by some contextual specification
of qualia role information. Consider the following data involving the quasi ‘light’ verb use :

(23a) *Yanning finishing using his gun (to kill a bird).
(23b) Yannig finished using the tomato (to prepare a dish / *to throw it).
Use reconstructs a purpose clause (cf. Whelpton 1999) and inherits its event structure and
incrementality functions from the content of the TELIC of its internal argument. The type gun
possessing an i-incremental event in its TELIC (shoot_at(e,y:human_ind,z,x:gun)),
(23a) turns out i-incremental. On the contrary, since natural kinds often lack definite TELIC
roles, the incrementality of (23b) is contextually infered (see Asher and Pustejovsky 1999).
5. 3. Dynamicity, external arguments and disabled incrementality functions
Some other examples of coercion involving non-light verbs illustrate how incrementality
functions can be contextually ‘disabled’, cf. (24) :
(24a) Yannig presented his passport in two minutes / for two minutes.
(24b) The bay presented a magnificent sight for a century / ??in a century.(OK if inchoative)
I assume that the AGENTIVE of (potentially) telic verbs unify with that of their external
argument, since the former contains the causing subevent, and the latter the associated
‘causer’ entity. With a dynamic external argument as in (24a), present can read like an i-
incremental transition. Contrariwise, it only reads like a state with a non-dynamic external
argument (cf. bay), as in (24b), its incrementality function and causing event being ‘disabled’.

6. Non-incremental non-atomic events and sorted RSs / Result Stages
It has been shown above that incrementality falls short of explaining the non-atomicity of
(12) and (13). I will now introduce sorted RSs to account for such data, leaving aside ‘gradual

Patrick Caudal

scenario’ events (cf. (14)) as a pragmatic phenomenon ; this move will be justified by the
generality of the RS-based approach, even w.r.t. other aspectual notions such as telicity.

6.1. Introducing Result Stages and sorted RSs
I argued in 3.3 that scalar events are non-incremental because their affected arguments (cf.
the chicken in (13)) undergo a ‘holistic’ change-of-state (CoS), contrary to incremental
events, whose affected arguments undergo a ‘meronymic’ CoS (cf. his pancake(s) in (9)). In
other words, incremental CoSs affect subparts (i-parts or m-parts) of arguments, whereas
scalar CoSs affect entire arguments. (13) thus is telic and non-atomic because the (whole)
chicken goes through successive states of ‘cookedness’ before reaching a final state ; this
succession of states constitutes a scalar RS, which is not predicable of the subparts of an
argument, contrary to the RSs of incremental events. Encoding a richer information about RSs
in the lexicon, as proposed in Caudal (1998b), appears necessary in the light of such facts ix.

Moreover, Caudal (1998b) argues that telicity should be represented by assigning two
opposed RSs to telic events (a primary RS associated to the event’s development; cf. John’s
been drinking his beer, and a secondary RS associated to the event’s completion, cf. John’s
drunk his beer), versus only one RS (a primary RS, too) for atelic events. The existence of an
opposition between two RSs explains why a CoS occurs with telic events. Following Caudal
(1998b), I will therefore attribute unary Result Stages (RStages) to atelic events, and binary
RStages to telic events. RStages will thus consist in one or two RSs.

6.2. Telicity and the RStage-based approach to event structure
Incrementality, as noted above, was introduced in connection to telicity ; I will now turn to
the latter notion, to check whether the approach formulated above could be applied to it.
Krifka (1992) formulated a detailed formal treatment of the (a)telicity of non-atomic events
using event-object mapping functions. Consider the following contrast :
(25)    John ran for two hours / *in two hours.
(26)    John ran a mile in two hours / for two hours.
(25) lacks an incremental argument, and is therefore atelic, whereas the introduction of such
an incremental argument in (26) with an m-incrementality function allows for a telic reading.

Yet it can be demonstrated that telicity, like (non-)atomicity, cannot be accounted for on
the basis of incrementality alone. Let us turn again to scalar events vs. non-scalar ones :
(27)    John cooked this chicken in / for two hours.
(28)    John drank a glass of beer in / *for two hours.
Incrementality cannot explain the telicity of cook in (27), since this chicken does not
behave like an incremental theme ; telicity combined with non-atomicity does not necessarily
entail incrementality. Moreover, incrementality cannot explain either why cook also receives
an atelic reading - (27) is optionally telic, whereas (28) is obligatorily telic. It seems that
scalar verbs are often optionally telic (cf. (re)heat, wash, polish etc.), whereas incremental
ix
An anonymous reviewer suggested that a ‘state’ incrementality could be attributed to cook, claiming that it
would make a theory of RStages superfluous. This proposal is not new ; Jackendoff (1996 :332-335) and
Ramchand (1997) assigned some kind of (stative) ‘property scale’ to scalar events. But this leaves the difference
between scalar and incremental events w.r.t. affectedness/CoS unexplained : why do the former affect a whole
individual in a scalar way, and the latter bits of an individual in a non-scalar way ? We cannot answer this
question without a theory of CoSs and RStages and of their role in event construal. The ‘state’ incrementality /
‘property scale’ approach misses this point, so that it is little more than an ad hoc solution.

Achievements vs. Accomplishments

verbs such as drink are not (if their incremental theme is syntactically realized ; compare eat-
intransitive with eat-transitive).

Contrariwise, the RStage-based approach to event structure can explain the optional telicity
of cook. If we take into account the fact that scalar verbs possess a scalar primary RS, it
appears that they receive a telic reading iff the corresponding ‘final degree’ (e.g., the state of
(well-) cookedness for cook) is reached, and receive an atelic one if it is not reached. Scalar
verbs such as cook and wash behave as if one could iterate an action indefinitely without
reaching a stable, final RS : one can cook a chicken several times and yet not cook it
completely, or cook it beyond the point of well-cookedness (in which case it is ‘too’ cooked).

6.3. Incrementality and RStages
I have argued above that a unified account of (non-)incremental non-atomic events requires
a theory of RStages. Different types of RStages should thus be lexically attributed to
incremental verbs and to scalar verbs (cf. the RStage feature in (17) / (18) ; note that it should
share its content with the FORMAL role, since the latter shared its content with ‘result’
subevents in Pustejovsky 1995). Let us assume a many-sorted logic (cf. White 1994)
incorporating sort axioms. I argue below that the RStages of e.g., m-incremental verbs should
be m-incremental, a fact mirrored in the corresponding sort axioms (cf. (29)-iii). Contrariwise,
I claim that scalar verbs should be endowed with non-incremental, scalar RStages.
(29)   Sort axioms for unary vs. binary Rstages / binary m-incremental_RStages :
i) ∀e,x [ Defined (Binary_RStage(e,x)) ↔ ∃e1, e2 [ Primary_RS(e1,x) ∧ Secondary_RS(e2,x) ∧
e = e1 ∪ e2 ∧ e1 @ e2 ∧ Delimited+ (e)] ]
ii) ∀e,x [ Defined (Unary_RStage(e,x)) ↔ [ Primary_RS(e,x) ∧ Delimited- (e) ] ]
iii) ∀e,x [ Defined (Binary-m-inc_RStage(e,x)) ↔ [ Binary_RStage(e,x) ∧ m-inc(x,e) ] ]
I am making use above of an ‘abut’ operator on events noted @, and of sorts expressing (non-
) delimitedness, noted Delimited+/-. (29) describes sort axioms for unary, binary and m-
incremental binary RStages. It attributes a m-inc function to the latter type of RStages in
axiom iii). Note that binary RStages are viewed here as transition functions, developping
along some odometer, rather than proper ‘stative’ subevents. I also assume that some structure
preserving mapping function Res(e’,e) relates an event’s development e’ to its RStage e, so
that the event-object homomorphism carries over from e to e’, and m-inc(x,e’) is true as well.
Scalar RStages will involve a more general theory of scalar sortal domains I cannot describe
here for want of space, but see Pustejovsky (1999) for a related proposal. The basic idea is
that scalar sortal domains include a scaling function ranging over a scalar semi-lattice
structure representing the succession of ‘sub-result states’ involved.

7. Conclusion
It has been demonstrated in this paper that the so-called punctuality of events should be
reduced to the notion of atomicity. It has been shown that (non-)atomicity is at least partly a
compositional semantic category, rather than a purely pragmatic one, and that it is directly
related to incrementality in many cases, though not in all cases. Formal means to calculate
(non-)atomicity within an NLP system have been discussed (see White (1994) for a
computational implementation of related interest, in a similar spirit). The machinery exposed
above can be used to predict whether an event should be considered as an accomplishment
(i.e., a non-atomic event, possessing internal subevents) or an achievement (i.e., an atomic
event, lacking any internal subevent). In order to construe incremental non-atomic events, I
proposed to encode m-incrementality vs. i-incrementality in the lexicon, before discussing the
problems raised by the polysemous internal structure of certain nouns, or the variations
exhibited by certain verbs w.r.t. incrementality functions. Finally, a tentative RStage-based

Patrick Caudal

account of non-incremental non-atomic events has been put forth. I showed that this approach
can also be successfully applied to all types of non-atomic events, and could also be applied
to telicity. In short, the RStage approach to event structure provides us with a unified
treatmentx of (non-)atomicity, incrementality and telicity – a result which standard
incrementality-based approaches cannot achieve for reasons exposed above.

References
ASHER N. and J. PUSTEJOVSKY (1999), The Metaphysics of Words in Context. Ms., Brandeis
University.
CAUDAL P. (1998a), Using Complex Lexical Types to Model the Polysemy of Collective Nouns
within the Generative Lexicon. In Proceedings of DEXA’98, Los Alamitos : IEEE Computer Society,
pp.154-160.
CAUDAL P. (1998b), Lexical Semantics and Aspect in French : Encoding Sorted Result Stages in the
Lexicon. Paper presented at Going Romance’98, University of Utrecht, December 10-12.
DECLERCK R. (1979), Aspect and the bounded/unbounded (telic/atelic) distinction, Linguistics, 17,
pp.761-794.
DOWTY D. (1986), The Effects of Aspectual Class on the Temporal Structure of Discourse :
Semantics or Pragmatics ?, Linguistics and Philosophy, 9, pp.37-61.
DOWTY D. (1991), Thematic Proto-Roles and Argument Selection, Languages, 67/3, pp.547-619.
JACKENDOFF R. (1996), The Proper Treatment of Measuring Out, Telicity and Perhaps Event
Quantification in English, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 14, pp.305-354.
KRIFKA M. (1992), Thematic Relations as Links between Nominal Reference and Temporal
Constitution. In I. Sag and A. Szabolsci, Eds., Lexical Matters, Stanford: CSLI.
LEVIN B. and M. RAPPAPORT HOVAV (1995), Unaccusativity: At the Syntax - Lexical Semantics
Interface, Cambridge: MIT Press.
LINK G. (1983), The Logical Analysis of Plurals and Mass Terms. In R. Baüerle, C. Schwarze and A.
von Stechow, Eds., Meaning, Use and Interpretation of Language, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp.302-
323.
MOENS M. and M. STEEDMAN (1988), Temporal Ontology and Temporal Reference, Computational
Linguistics, 14/2, Cambridge: MIT Press.
PUSTEJOVSKY J. (1995), The Generative Lexicon, Cambridge: MIT Press.
PUSTEJOVSKY J. (1999), Decomposition and Type Construction. Ms., Brandeis University.
PUSTEJOVSKY J. and P. BOUILLON (1997), Aspectual Coercion and Logical Polysemy, Journal of
Semantics, 12, pp.133-162.
RAMCHAND G. (1997), Aspect and Predication. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
TENNY C. (1994), Aspectual Roles and the Syntax-Semantics Interface, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
VENDLER Z. (1957), Verbs and Times, The Philosophical Review, 66, pp.143-160.
VERKUYL H. (1993), A Theory of Aspectuality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
WHELPTON M. (1999), An Argument Structure Account of Infinitives of Result, Ms., University of
California, Irvine.
WHITE M. (1994), A Computational Approach to Aspectual Composition, unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
x
Note that even path-argument verbs can be analysed in terms of RStages if changes of location undergone by
arguments are treated as some kind of CoSs, and therefore involve an incremental RStage.
