Conférence TALN 1999, Cargèse, 12-17 juillet 1999
Types of Semantic Information Necessary in a
Machine Translation Lexicon
David Mowatt
UMIST, Manchester, UK
dmowatt@fs1.ccl.umist.ac.uk | http://www.ccl.umist.ac.uk/ra/dmowatt/

Abstract
This paper describes research undertaken into assessing what types of semantic information
(SI) are needed in a Machine Translation (MT) lexicon in order for ‘good’ translation quality
to be attainable. We present a typology of semantic information, allowing the use of
semantics in any MT system to be quantified in precise and absolute, rather than relative,
terms. This typology was used to survey the SI present in twenty commercial and research
MT systems. An automatically translated corpus was analysed to identify which types of
semantics were necessary to achieve high quality translation. The survey and the analysis
allowed us to conclude that four of the nine types of SI identified should always be included
and that a further two complex SI types should be considered for inclusion pending further
analysis. A formal lexicon specification incorporating these six SI types is presented.
1.       Introduction
It is interesting to note that linguistic researchers have moved from primitive context free
grammars (CFGs) to much more complex grammars such as HPSG, where the debate is not
so much what syntax is encoded to how it is represented and how syntax interacts with other
linguistic information, such as semantics and pragmatics.
The debate on how much or even which types of semantic information (henceforth SI) is
needed (by rule-based natural language analysis systems) to disambiguate sentences has not
however progressed to the same extent. The MultiLex project supports this assertion. The
lexicon specification present within the report contained only the very minimum level of
semantic coverage, “only the first step towards the building of a type system”.i The authors
agree that more semantics are needed, yet fail to provide an actual lexicon specification for
them. ii
Our research aimed to provide a concrete lexicon specification for those wishing to use
more complex semantics. In order to find out what types of SI the lexicon should be able to
support, we first researched the existing semantic content of MT / NLP system lexicons as
well as assessing the utility of each type.

2.       Semantics in the Lexicon
The first aim of our research was to find out what types of SI should be included in MT
systems – System Y uses SI types 3, 4 and 8, System Z just uses type 5. It was not to propose
an answer to the (perhaps impossible) question of just what quantity of SI should be included
– System X should have n amount of SI type 1, m amount of SI type 2…iii. We examined

i
Cf. McNaught and Smith (ed.) 1992:99.
ii
The is also true for the extensive EAGLES survey of semantics, cf. Sanfillipo et al. (1998).
iii
Nirenburg et al. (1996) did attempt this reduction of SI in a system to mathematical figures, though their
methodology again only allows one to quantify SI in MT systems in a particularly imprecise manner.

David Mowatt

semantics in existing MT systems and in lexicon documentation (such as MultiLex, Eurotra,
Systran, KBMT) in order to draw up a typology of SI. While the author is certain that other
SI types could exist, the typology presented does seem to successfully account for every full-
scale (non-theoretical) system.
2.1.    A Typology of Semantic Information
The table below contains a typology of SI. Each type is accompanied by a description and,
in column (#), the number of commercial systems who claimed, when surveyed, to
incorporate this type of SI. The order of the types was determined by their complexity
(semantic primitives are generally yes/no attributes, whereas ontologies are complex
interrelated structures), how they are used (subject domain information provides general
indications whereas real world knowledge (RWK) allow complex semantic interpretations
of sentences) and how commonly a type was incorporated into systems featured in the survey:
t    Type of Information          Explanation                                                   #
t0    None                         No semantic information is used at all                        1
t1    Sense Order                  The senses are stored in order of frequency:                  1
Plant s1 = non-animate living thing
Plant s2 = factory
t2    Sense Frequencies            Proportional measurements of frequency                        10
Plant non-animate = 0.8, Plant factory = 0.2
t3    Subject Domain               The typical subject area(s) of a given sense:                 18
Plant s1 (living) = General Domain
Plant s2 (factory) = Manufacturing Domain
t4    Semantic Primitives          A limited set of primitives: abstract/real,                   14
+/-place, +/-time:
Plant s1 = real, living, non-sentient
Plant s2 (factory) = real, place
t5    Collocations                 Words commonly found together. No                             15
grammatical relation between words identified.
Plant (life), (manufacturing) plant
t6    Common Subjects              As with collocations, but with a grammatical                  12
and Objects                  relation.
“grow s2 object = plant s1”
t7    Framesiv / Real World        Uses not just the triple (WORD1 | GRAMMATICAL/                3
Knowledge                    SEMANTIC RELATION | WORD2), but a complex
interlinked relationship with lots of actions,
properties, and different relations.
The verb 'to plant' involves a living_plant
object which is placed in the ground by a human,
typically a gardener etc.
t8    Use of an IS_A               Semantic primitives are used to form a complex                2 small
Ontology                     Plant s1 IS_A vegetative_lifeform                             / 1 big
Plant s2 IS_A industrial_place
t9    Extended ontologies          Nodes in the ontology use more than the IS_A                  0
relation:
Plant s1 LOCATION garden
Plant s1 HAS_PART stem
iv
Frames were used extensively in the research of Hirst (cf. Hirst, 1987) to semantically encode events, and all
the subevents and concepts of which they are formed. Currently, only a few systems use descriptions like
frames to encode semantic information, such as Fujitsu’s Atlas, and Transparent’s Transcend.

Types of Semantic Information Necessary in a Machine Translation Lexicon

The typology presented is unique not because of the individual types identified, but
because it the first attempt to present a method of identifying and classifying all types of SI
with such a level of precision.
2.2.     Semantic Information in Actual MT Systems
The survey of SI in the systems revealed both the vast majority of systems surveyed (70%)
relied heavily on types t4 – t6 for disambiguation: semantic primitives (t4) and collocation
information either with or without having identifying specific relations between words (types
t6 and t5). The ‘popularity’ of these three types comes from their tremendous power to
disambiguate senses (cf. for example, Yarowsky, 1995:189).
Globalink, GMS, LOGOS are amongst those systems which claim to use more
sophisticated types of SI. Globalink’s top of the range systems and GMS’s T1 systems are of
comparable quality – though notably, despite their commercial success, they are both said to
be under-performing because the SI present in the systems is not complex enoughv; LOGOS
is also highly reputed, yet their system differs as customers are expected to tailor lexica and
grammars much more than other systems demand.
However, counter to the belief that more complex SI will necessarily yield better results,
Systran is frequently accepted to be the world’s best performing MT system yet it only
incorporates SI types t1 – t6, and some t8 The survey also revealed though that they will be
incorporating more SI (t2) to further improve translation quality.
No-one knows how well a system incorporating all nine identified SI types would translate
because no-one has ever successfully developed a full system which can use this quantity of
SI. This would require, according to researchers of KBMT, “all relevant domain knowledge”
(Nyberg, 1992:3) – a near impossibility therefore for free text input. Full t1-t9 systems
certainly do not exist yetvi. Many have experimented with large levels of semantics, such as
Memtah, only to abandon a full scale implementation in favour of a “only if needed” vii basis
only. The KBMT team themselves admit that such systems are currently only financially
feasible in very restricted domains, Nyberg (1997:2).

3.       Using Translated Corpora to develop a Lexicon Specification
Based on the assumption that a translation of certain sentences is only possible with a
certain level of SI, we wanted to discover which types of SI could be said to be necessary in
an MT lexicon so that we could incorporate them into our lexicon specification. As we were
particularly interested in translation for assimilationviii, we also wanted to be able to say that
we felt types tx and ty did not merit the effort required to input them into each lexical entry
because they did not significantly enhance translation quality. We wanted to propose a
lexicon specification that would provide enough information for disambiguation without
being inherently financially infeasible.
A 3000 word bilingual corpus of texts on the subject of the World Wide Web, containing
lots of domain specific terminology, technical language and general language, was translated
by a human, by Systran Professional and by Globalink’s French Assistant. Using knowledge
about how MT systems worked, we attempted to deduce in each case why a system did not
translate correctly (what we will term as a reverse-perspective evaluation). The error report
thus contained:

v
Ann Devitt, Lernout and Hauspie, during Trinity College Dublin Computational Linguistics Seminar Series.
vi
Dahlgren, 1988, claimed to have a text-understanding system that used up to type t9, but with a vocabulary of
only several thousand words, compared to the 360,000 words contained in Systran’s lexicons
vii
ipc. Helen McKay, Adacel Technologies, 1998
viii
Cf. Jordan, Dorr and Benoit, 1993:50

David Mowatt
(1) the area where changes need to be made (the lexicon, the grammar or both)
(2) whether or not the MT system would be able to successfully translate the phrase it
got wrong if the new word / sense or new syntactic structure was added to the
existing lexicon / grammar
(3) if the existing specification was insufficient, what would need to be added to the
system for it to translate correctly ?
A preliminary examination of the corpora revealed that too many mistakes were made in
the translations produced by the French Assistant software for there to have been value for the
project in analysing them:
Systran:        Les bruits et les films sont également possibles, cependant souvent trop grand
pour que beaucoup de gens téléchargent et pour entendent ou regarder.
Globalink :     Ses et cinéma sont aussi possibles, pourtant souvent trop grand télécharger
pour beaucoup de personnes et entend ou vue.
All following observations thus relate only to the translation performed by Systran.

4.       A Specification for the Semantics Section of an MT Lexicon
The results of the analysis were combined with knowledge of what SI types are already
used in MT systems to propose a specification for the semantics section of an MT lexicon.
Though many examples were used as evidence in the original analysis, we limit ourselves to
just one example per SI type in this paper - each example has incorrectly translated words
underlined, followed by the source language word and the correct translation in brackets.
4.1.     Subject Domains and Sense Frequency - t1, t2 - and Subject Domains - t3
We recommend that sense frequency and subject domain information should be included.
In the following example identifying the IT domain would have ensured correct translation of
three incorrectly translated words:
From a technical point of view, the WWW connects waiters (serveurs = servers) HTTP who send pages
HTML to stations (postes = terminal) equipped with a navigator (navigateur = browser).
Subject Domain              =    (Agriculture | Banking | Computers | etc. ) *
Sense Frequency             =    (0.0 – 1.0) ?

A full list of values for Subject Domain could not be specified as only the IT domain was
studied in this research, but we do though expect this field however to be dynamic in nature
and expand as more domains are added. Sense Frequency is intended to be a ‘last resort’
mechanism when all other disambiguation fails: SI type t1 is here made redundant by type t2.
4.2.     Inheritance, IS_A Ontologies and Semantic Primitives – t4 and t8
Virtually all MT systems use semantic primitives, though we found that using an IS_A
ontology t8 can replace them, be more powerful and still be both computationally efficient and
easy to code into lexical entries.
By Web you can visit an exposure (exposition = exhibition), read your newspaper, learn English, control
(commander = order) a pizza pie.
Inherit                     =    (Word#Sense) *
Stating all of the possible objects for commander or visiter would be time consuming and
ad-hoc – using an IS_A ontology provides the same semantic power but with much greater
ease. The top level ontology nodes can be used to encode features such as sentience,

Types of Semantic Information Necessary in a Machine Translation Lexicon

abstractness  and movability and these can perform the same function as primitives (cf.
Mowatt 1997 for a complete list). SI type t4 is thus made redundant by type t8.
4.3.      Real World Properties - t7 and t9
RWK is generally accepted as being time-consuming to code and as necessary only when
translating a small percentage of sentences, yet it is also accepted that using it sometimes
provides the only way to translate certain sentences correctly.
En cliquant sur le nom de l’auteur d’un article vous pouvez ainsi avoir son adresse, sa photo…
While clicking on the name of the author of an article you can thus have his address, its (son == his)
photograph…
“his photo” could either mean “the photo he possesses” or “the photo that pictures him”. The owner
of the photo would have to be a human or an institution (i.e. a gallery might own the photo),
and the picture in the photo (the content) would have to be a tangible thing. If this was
encoded under the RWK categories of owner = sentient and content = real, then only
“author” would be a plausible candidate – “nom”, “article” and “adresse” are ruled out.
RWProperty                     =    <RWFieldName> <RWFieldValue>
RWFieldName                    =    IsA| HasPart | Content | Duration | (etc.)
RWFieldValue                   =    “Word#Sense”+ | <Ontology_Node>+
Ontology_Node                  =    Profession | Body_Part | Male | NoSize (etc.)
Use of RWK cannot (yet) be definitively asserted as necessary for high quality translation,
but we acknowledge its potential utility by including a possible way of encoding it in the
lexicon whilst accepting that further research into RWK for large-scale systems is required.
4.4.      Selectional Preferences – t5 & t6
Selectional preferences provide a way of stating the preferred subjects / objects etc. of a
given word using semantic or collocation information. The correct translation of mondial,
universel, global (in French or English) and world is most easily achieved by having a list of
collocation objects, rather than complex semantic analysis:
Une dimension mondiale = A global (not world) dimension. Also: village planétaire = global village;
guerre mondiale = world war, and similar words such as mortal / fatal / deadly.
SelPref                        =    <ApplyTo> <Field> <Operator> <Value>
ApplyTo                        =    Subject | Object 1 | Object 2 | Modified Unit
Field                          =    (Any lexicon field) | <RWField> | (Text | Word#Sense)
Operator                       =    Equals | Not Equals
Value                          =    “Text” | (Appropriate field value)
The precise mechanics of how, given multiple selectional preferences for different senses,
the parser is to weight each preference, is a problem that will not be discussed here. Our
concern is to give the parser enough linguistic power and information to be theoretically able
to disambiguate sentences, not to propose how it actually achieves it.

5.        Conclusion and Further Work
We have presented a typology of semantic information which identifies nine individual
types. When this typology was used in a survey of MT systems, it was revealed that no
system currently in existence makes full use of sophisticated SI types such as real world
knowledge t7 and extended ontologies t9, and few make use of IS_A ontologies t8.
Our analysis of the translated corpora suggested that of the nine SI types, t2, t3, and t8
should be incorporated into each lexical entry, and that type t6 should be used as often as is

David Mowatt

necessary. The analysis also strongly suggested that types t7 and t9 would be of value to the
translation process and for this reason we have proposed a possible implementation in the
lexicon.
Our current research is focussing on what quantity of SI types t7 and t9 is needed (in each
entry) to achieve translation quality that is unobtainable using the other seven types alone.
The results of this research should be available towards the end of this year.

6.     Acknowledgements
Thanks primarily to Blaise Nkwenti-Azeh who supervised the original MSc dissertation on
which this paper was based and who later helped with the manuscript. Many thanks also to
all of the researchers from the MT companies who participated in the survey of semantic
types in MT systems. Finally, we would like to thank Systran for translating our test corpora.

7.     References
COPELAND C., DURAND J., KRAUWER S., MAEGAARD B. Ed. (1991). Studies in Machine
Translation and Natural Language Processing : The Eurotra Linguistic Specifications. Office for
Official Publication of the Commission of the European Community. Luxembourg.
DAHLGREN K. (1988) Naive Semantics for Natural Language Understanding. Kluwer Publishers,
Boston, Massachusetts.
GATES, D. ET AL. (1989) Lexicons. In Machine Translation. Vol. 4, No. 1, March 1989. pp.67-112
HIRST, G. (1987) Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution of Ambiguity. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
JORDAN P., DORR B. AND BENOIT J. (1993) A First-Pass Approach for Evaluating Machine
Translation Systems in the Journal of Machine Translation, Vol. 6, Nos. 1-2. Kluwer Publishers,
pp49-58
HUTCHINS W. AND SOMERS H. (1992) An Introduction to Machine Translation. Academic Press,
London
MCNAUGHT J. AND SMITH S. Ed. (1992) MultiLex : Definition of the Standard Monolingual
Description of Lexical Items. ESPRIT Project 5304 MultiLex
MOWATT D. (1997) A Knowledge Rich Lexicon Specification for Transfer-Based Machine
Translation Systems. UMIST, Manchester.
NIRENBURG S., CARBONELL J., TOMITA M., GOODMAN K. (1992) Machine Translation : A
Knowledge-based Approach. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. San Mateo. California
NYBERG E. AND MITAMURA T. (1992) The KANT System: Fast, Accurate High Quality Translation
in Practical Domains, in Proceedings of COLING-92, Nantes, France.
SADLER V. (1989) Working with Analogical Semantics : Disambiguation Techniques in DLT. Foris
Publications, Dordrecht
SANFILIPPO A. ET AL (1998) EAGLES Preliminary Recommendations on Semantic Encoding.
Interim Report (not yet in public domain).
YAROWSKY D. (1995) Unsupervised Word Sense Disambiguation Methods Rivalling Supervised
Methods. In Proceedings of 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
[ACL95], Cambridge, MA. pp.189-196
