TALN 2011, Montpellier, 27juin — 1"'ju1'11et 2011

Corpus-Based methods for Short Text Similarity

Prajol Shrestha
LINA-UFR Sciences, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3
praj o1.shrestha@etu.univ-nantes.fr

Résumé. Cet article concerne la determination de la similarité entre des textes courts (phrases, paragraphes,
...). Ce probleme est souvent abordé dans la littérature a1’aide de méthodes supervisées ou de ressources externes
comme le thesaurus Wordnet ou le British National Corpus. Les méthodes que nous proposons sont non super-
visées et n’utilisent pas de connaissances a priori. La premiere méthode que nous présentons est basée sur le
modele Vectoriel de Salton auquel nous avons apporté des modiﬁcations pour prendre en compte le contexte, le
sens et la relation entre les mots des textes. Dans un deuxieme temps, nous testons les mesures de Dice et de
ressemblance pour résoudre ce probleme ainsi que l’utilisation de la racinisation. Enﬁn, ces différentes méthodes
sont évaluées et comparées aux résultats obtenus dans la littérature.

Abstract. This paper presents corpus-based methods to ﬁnd similarity between short text (sentences, para-
graphs, ...) which has many applications in the ﬁeld of NLP. Previous works on this problem have been based on
supervised methods or have used external resources such as WordNet, British National Corpus etc. Our methods
are focused on unsupervised corpus-based methods. We present a new method, based on Vector Space Model,
to capture the contextual behavior, senses and correlation, of terms and show that this method performs better
than the baseline method that uses vector based cosine similarity measure. The performance of existing document
similarity measures, Dice and Resemblance, are also evaluated which in our knowledge have not been used for
short text similarity. We also show that the performance of the vector—based baseline method is improved when
using stems instead of words and using the candidate sentences for computing the parameters rather than some
external resource.

Mots-clés : Similarité, Modele Vectoriel, Mesure de Similarité.

Keywords: Similarity, Vector Space Model, Similarity metric.

PRAJOL SHRESTHA

1 Introduction

Many natural language processing applications use similarity between short text (e. g. sentences, paragraphs) such
as text summarization (Lin & Hovy, 2003), which works on sentence or paragraph level; question answering,
which uses similarity between the question answer pairs (Mohler & Mihalcea, 2009) ; and image retrieval, where
an image is retrieved by ﬁnding the similarity between the query and the image caption (Coelho et al., 2004).

In general, existing methods view the short text similarity problem as a classiﬁcation task, where one—to—one text
similarity decision is made, or as an aligmnent task, where many-to-many text similarity decision is also made.
Most of the existing methods treat this problem as a classiﬁcation task which use similarity metrics (Abdalgader
& Skabar, 2011)(Cordeiro et al., 2007)(Mihalcea & Corley, 2006)(Hatzivassiloglou et al., 1999). These similarity
metrics give a value of similarity between pairs of short text which can then classify the pairs as similar or not
using a threshold. This threshold value is usually empirically ﬁxed for each similarity metric. These existing
methods use external knowledge like WordNet (Miller et al., 1990) to ﬁnd lexical similarity or some corpora
like the British National Corpus for optimizing parameters. These methods are not suitable for languages that do
not have resources like WordNet or large corpora. This leads to ﬁnd similarity measures that use no resources
or resources that are easily buildable. There are few methods that treat the similarity problem as an alignment
task (Barzilay, 2003)(Nelken & Shieber, 2006). These methods also use similarity metrics like the classiﬁcation
methods but the value from these metrics are not used directly for alignment. The alignment in these methods are
based on supervised methods and use dynamic programming which includes the context of the sentences and are
designed for comparable monolingual text.

We take the similarity problem between short text as a classiﬁcation task. This task is based on corpus—based
unsupervised methods which do not use external resources to compute the similarity value unlike existing classi-
ﬁcation methods. One of the earliest and well known classiﬁcation method for text similarity is the Vector Space
Model (VSM) for information retrieval, where similar documents in a collection is chosen by a similarity value
computed using a similarity metric, the cosine similarity, between the vectors of term weights representing docu-
ments (Salton et al., 1975). This measure is based on the overlap of terms in the document pair whose similarity
is being measured.

The VSM assumes that the vectors of terms are independent, pairwise orthogonal, to each other which is unrealis-
tic. There exist other vector space models like the Generalized Vector Space Model (GVSM) (Wong et al., 1987)
which does not assume this independence and although this model claims to be more effective than the standard
implementation of the VSM, it is computationally expensive and therefore VSM is widely used despite its unre-
alistic assumption. The VSM for information retrieval is modiﬁed and used for short text similarity by treating
the short text as documents and computing the idf value using external resources like the British National Corpus.
This VSM cosine similarity measure is the baseline for most of the similarity studies (Mihalcea & Corley, 2006).

Our similarity measure is based on VSM but is adopted in such a way that the assumption of term independence is
excluded and the short text vectors incorporates the sense and correlation of the terms. This is done by taking into
account the overlap of the terms in all the short text of the corpus rather than only the short text pair between which
the similarity is measured. Along presenting a new method to ﬁnd similar short text we evaluate the performance
of two other information retrieval methods which use term overlaps namely Dice measure (Marming & Schiitze,
1999) and Resemblance measure 1 (Lyon et al., 2001). We also show that using stems instead of words can improve
the baseline VSM model for short text similarity.

2 Related Works

In information retrieval, there are many methods to ﬁnd similarity between documents and one of the most well
known method is the VSM which uses cosine similarity measure (Barron—Cedeno et al., 2009). This vector based
method is also used to measure similarity between sentences as done by Barzilay et al. (Barzilay, 2003). They view
the problem of ﬁnding similar sentences as an alignment problem, where they align similar sentences between two
monolingual comparable documents. In their method, the paragraphs are ﬁrst aligned by a trained classiﬁer and
once the paragraphs are aligned the sentences within them are aligned using vector based cosine similarity and

1. also known as the J accard or Tanimoto coefﬁcient (Manning & Schiitze, 1999)

CORPUS-BASED METHODS FOR SHORT TEXT SIMILARITY

dynamic programming. Rani et al. (Nelken & Shieber, 2006) took the same problem as Barzilay et al. and proposed
an improved robust method. This method also uses dynamic programming for alignment but uses cosine similarity
measure in a logistic regression to provide a score to aid the alignment. Both of these methods use context around
the sentences, the following and preceding sentences, to aid in aligmnent. These methods for alignment make
many—to—many sentence alignment and do not provide a similarity value between sentences indicating that these
methods are suitable to ﬁnd similar sentences only in comparable monolingual corpora.

Another method that uses the concept of overlap like the cosine measure is the ﬁngerprinting method. It takes
into account the overlap of bigrams or trigrams between the text to calculate a value of resemblance as shown in
Lyon et al.(Lyon et al., 2001) which is the basis of classifying similar text and has been used to detect plagiarism.
Cordeiro et al. (Cordeiro et al., 2007) has also proposed a similarity metric to identify similarity between texts and
to identify paraphrase based on word overlap. It computes a similarity value by combining the ratio of common
words in each sentence and is focused on capturing paraphrases which makes it unsuitable to ﬁnd other types of
similar sentences for example, this metric gives a similarity value zero to identical sentences.

Linguistic features has also been used to ﬁnd similarity between short text as in Hatzivassiloglou et al. (Hatzi-
vassiloglou et al., 1999). They build linguistic feature vectors to build r11les in a supervised manner to classify
paragraph pairs. The features used to build rules are noun phrase matching, WordNet synonyms, common word
class of verbs, shared common noun and their combinations. Even though it performs better than the vector based
cosine similarity measure, it requires resources like Wordnet which are not present and are hard to build for other
resource less languages.

Recent researches are focused on ﬁnding the similarity between lexical items in short text to ﬁnd the similarities
between these text. There exist corpus—based approaches to ﬁnd the lexical similarity, some of which use text
pattern analysis, Pointwise mutual information (PMI) and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). We will not focus on
WordNet based approaches to ﬁnd lexical similarity (Abdalgader & Skabar, 2011). Mihalcea et al. (Mihalcea &
Corley, 2006) use PMI and LSA to compute the text semantic similarity using a wrapper given in equation 1.

1 Z3weT1maa:S'im(w, T2) >|< idf(w) + Ewen. mawS'im(w, T1) * idf(w)

sim(T1, T2) : 2( EIUET1  EMIET2  )

(1)

maar:S'z'm(w, T2(1)) is the maximum lexical similarity between the word w in sentence T1(2) and all the words in
sentence T20) and idf (w) is the inverse document frequency of the word w calculated from the British National
Corpus. The similarity metric, STS, proposed by Islam et al. (Islam & Inkpen, 2008), unlike other metrics, use
string similarity along with corpus—based word similarity. Corpus—based word similarity is measured using two
measures that includes second order co—occurrence pointwise mutual information and common word order simi-
larity. The string similarity is measured using the concept of Longest Common Sequence. All these three measures
are combined to determine the similarity between two short text. All the mentioned corpus—based method have the
sa1ne drawback of using external resources.

3 Short Text Similarity

In this section, we present a new method to ﬁnd similarity between short text. For simplicity reasons, we explain
the method using sentence as our short text. Our similarity method is based on VSM but is different in the way the
sentence vectors are created. The dimensions in sentence vectors do not represent the terms in the collection of
sentences as in the bag of words model (Baeza—Yates & Ribeiro—Neto, 1999) but rather created from term vectors.
Given a corpus C’ of n sentences and m unique terms, the term vector for term tj is created with 11 number of
dimensions in which the presence and absence of the term in each sentence is indicated by a boolean value :17 :

t; = [w1,a:2,ar:3, 2:4,  mi 6 0,1;i E 1 to n;0 = absent, 1 = present (2)

This term vector representation is similar to the wordspace model (Schutze, 1998) where the distribution of the
terms are stored. These representation of term vectors together will form a m x n term—sentence matrix and as
the number of sentence increases the size of the matrix will also increase. This huge dimension of the matrix can
be reduced to some extent by removing stopwords and stemmingz. There are also mathematical procedures for
the reduction of the matrix like Latent Semantic Analysis (Deerwester et al., 1990) which uses singular value
decomposition, SVD, or Principle Component Analysis (Jolliffe, 1986) which represents the matrix in different

2. http ://snowba1l.tartarus.org/

PRAJOL SHRESTHA

coordinates. We have used the simple technique of removing the stopwords and stemming words but none of the
mathematical procedures to reduce the dimension during our experiments. This representation of term vector will
consist of many zero values which will take a lot of memory. To reduce this space, we represent the vector in a
reduced form where only the dimensions having value 1 are kept as shown in Equation 3 where we assume that
the term tj is present in sentence numbers 1,5, and 8 :

{,7 = [(81, 1), (S5, 1), (S3, 1)] S, is the sentence number i where the term tj is present; 2' E 1 to n (3)

This term vector shows the different senses that the term may have. Here, the sense of the term means the idea with

which it can be related to. Our assumption is that sentences are independent to each other making each sentence
presenting a unique idea and therefore, each term present in a sentence is related to this idea. This assumption like
the assumption of VSM is unrealistic but the effect of this assumption can be reduced using clustering techniques
like hierarchical clustering (Han & Kamber, 2006) to group sentences that give the same idea or in other words
similar sentences. Clustering has not been used in the experiments. Once we have the term vectors we can create
sentence vectors by adding the term vectors of the terms present in the sentence making the number of dimension
of their sentence vector equal to the term vector. The term vector consists of only the boolean value to be added
which doesn’t provide much information about the term so while adding the term vector we add the inverse
document frequency, idf, value of the term which in our case is the inverse sentence frequency. This idf value is
computed from the sentences present in the corpus. For a sentence consisting of terms t1, t2, .., tn, the dimension,
2', corresponding to the sentence .5’, of the sentence vector will be :

d,- = 2§‘=1;tJ. E31/L'df_j idfj is the idf value of the term j ; 2' E 1 to n (4)

This method is similar to the method of second-order similarity (Kauﬁnann, 2000) and includes more informa-
tion other than cohesion of text by encoding three different information in the sentence vector which are  the
importance of each term using its idf  the co-occurrence of terms by adding up the idf values of all the terms
that occur in a sentence and the distribution of term along various sentences as the dimensions of the sentence
vector is equal to the number of sentences present in the corpus. Using these sentence vectors we can now com-
pute the similarity value between two sentences using the cosine similarity measure. We name our method Short
text based Vector Space Model, SVSM, to distinguish it from the other vector based models. This method can be
easily used to ﬁnd similarity between other types of short text by directly using the new type of short text instead
of sentences.

4 Experiments and Results

We used the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus(MSRPC) (Dolan et al., 2004) to evaluate our sentence sirni—
larity method which consists of 5801 pairs of sentences collected from a range of online newswire over a period
of 18 months for experiments. This dataset is divided into 4076 training pairs and 1725 test pairs. The training
pairs consist of 3900 paraphrases and the test pairs consist 1147 paraphrase. The remaining sentence pairs in the
corpora are not paraphrases. We test our method on these test pairs and compare results with other methods which
are tested on the same corpus. We also evaluated the performance of Dice measure, Resemblance measure and an
adaptation of the VSM cosine similarity measure on the same test corpus. Resemblance is the method explained in
section 2 and the Dice measure follows the same principle of term overlaps whose similarity value is given by the
ratio between twice the number of term overlaps and the total number of terms in both the sentences (Manning &
Schiitze, 1999). The adopted VSM cosine similarity measure, vector—based (A), is explained in section 1 and uses
stems instead of words and calculating the idf value from the given corpus rather than using some external one.
The evaluations of these methods are given in Table 1 where the evaluation value named accuracy represents the
number of correctly identiﬁed true or false classiﬁcations (Mihalcea & Corley, 2006) and the rest of the evaluation
values bare their traditional meaning. In Table 1, the ﬁrst two section of the table presents the best results accord-
ing to the highest accuracy achieved by increasing the threshold by 0.1. The remaining results from the other three
sections are taken from Abdalgader et al.(Abdalgader & Skabar, 2011).

Table 1 shows two baseline methods. The random method is the method which randomly assigns similarity values
to the sentence pairs and the vector—based method is the VSM based cosine similarity measure between two
sentences with tf*idf term weights computed using external corpus. All our experiments were done with stems
as terms and without stopwords. The results for our SVSM shows improvement over the baselines with higher
recall but are not better than existing methods. Our SVSM method uses the distribution of terms across sentences
from which it captures the sense of the term and the correlation between other terms which leads us to believe that

CORPUS-BASED METHODS FOR SHORT TEXT SIMILARITY

Methods Threshold Accuracy Precision Recall F-measure
Proposed Method
SVSM 0.7 68.9 71.7 87 .9 79.0
IR Methods
Vector-based (A) 0.4 71.0 71.0 95.4 81.4
Dice 0.5 70.6 72.7 89.2 80.2
Resemblance 0.1 68.1 70.6 89.1 78.8
Islam & Inkpen (2008) Corpus-based
STS 0.6 72.6 74.7 89.1 81.3
Mihalcea et al. (2006) Corpus-based
PMI-IR 0.5 69.9 70.2 95.2 81.0
LSA 0.5 68.4 69.7 95.2 80.5
Baselines

Vector-based 0.5 65.4 71.6 79.5 75.3
Random 0.5 51.3 68.3 50.0 57.8

TAB LE 1 — Different methods to detect similarity between sentences and their performance according to the accuracy, precision, recall, and
F-score on the MSR paraphrase detection test set are shown for the given thresholds.

the more sentences we have in our corpus the better it will perform. We evaluated this method on a larger set of
sentence pairs by using the complete MSRP corpus and found that the method does perform better. The result is
shown in the Table 2.

Methods Threshold Accuracy Precision Recall F-measure
Proposed Method
SVSM 0.6 68.3 70.25 91.7 79.6
IR Methods
Vector-based (A) 0.4 70.8 71.2 94.9 81.4

TABLE 2 — SVSM and VSM based cosine similarity results on the complete MSRP corpus with their performance evaluated according to
the accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score for the given thresholds.

The Dice measure and Resemblance measure perform better than the baseline methods and have similar F-measure
values with the existing methods. The evaluation of the Vector-based (A) method shows that this method is among
the best corpus—based sentence similarity methods with higher precision and recall values and Table 2 shows that
even with larger collection of text this method performs equally well.

5 Conclusion and Discussion

In this paper we introduce a new method (SVSM) to compute the similarity between short text which takes the
similarity problem as a classiﬁcation task. This new method is a modiﬁed version of VSM and is similar to the
second-order similarity method (Kaufmann, 2000). This method is able to capture the similarity between short
text by using short text vectors which encodes three corpus—based information which are the importance of the
term as idf, the distribution of terms in the short text of the corpus which represent the sense of the terms and the
correlation between terms present in the pair of short text. SVSM performs better than the baseline methods with
high recall and has the potential to perform better with more text available to be able to model the language by
encoding the three information it utilizes. Even though this method assumes that the short text are independent of
each other, which is unrealistic, we believe that the effect of this assumption can be reduced by using stems and
clustering techniques. This belief has not been tested and will be incorporated in our future work.

We also show that stemming increases the performance of Vector-based baseline and is one of the best corpus-
based sentence similarity method that exist at least for english. We also use two other information retrieval mea-
sures, Dice and Resemblance, to ﬁnd similar sentences and see that they do perform better than the baseline
methods. All these experiments have been done on the MSR paraphrase corpus which does not contain other types
of similar short text other than paraphrase and therefore, the results only partially represent the ability of the tech-
niques to determine similarity. Further experiments of other types of short text pairs must be done to understand
the full extent of the ability of our method.

PRAJOL SHRESTHA

Références

ABDALGADER K. & SKABAR A. (2011). Short—text similarity measurement using word sense disambiguation
and synonym expansion. A1 2010 :Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6464,
435-444.

BAEZA—YATES R. & RIBEIRO—NETO B. (1999). Modern Information Retrieval, volume 463. Addison Wesley.
BARRON-CEDENO A., EISELT A. & ROSSO P. (2009). Monoligual text similarity measures : A comparison of
models over wikipedia articles revisions. Proceedings of ICON-2009 : 7th International Conference on Natural
Language Processing.

BARZILAY R. (2003). Sentence alignment for monolingual comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the 2003
conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing, p. 25-32.

COELHO T. A. S., CALADO P. P., SOUZA L. V., RIBEIRO-NETO B. & MUNTZ R. (2004). Image retrieval
using multiple evidence ranking. TKDE, 16(4), 408-417.

CORDEIRO J ., DIAS G. & BRAZDIL P. (2007). Learning paraphrases from wns corpora. In Proceedings of the
20th Int. FIAIRS Conf AAAI Press, p. 193-198.

DEERWESTER S., DUMAIS S. T., FURNAS G. W., LANDAUER T. K. & HARSHMAN R. (1990). Indexing by
latent semantic analysis. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE, 41(6),
391-407.

DOLAN B ., QUIRK C. & BROCKETT C. (2004). Unsupervised construction of large paraphrase corpora :
Exploiting massively parallel news sources. 20th International Conf on Computational Linguistics, p. 350-356.
HAN J. & KAMBER M. (2006). Data Mining : Concepts and Techniques. Number Edition, Second. Morgan
Kaufmann.

HATZIVASSILOGLOU V., KLAVANS J. L. & ESKIN E. (1999). Detecting text similarity over short passages : Ex-
ploring linguistic feature combinations via machine learning. In Proceedings of the I 999 joint sigdat conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing and very large corpora, p. 203-212.

ISLAM A. & INKPEN D. (2008). Semantic text similarity using corpus-based word similarity and string similar-
ity. In ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data Vol. 2, Article I 0.

J OLLIFFE I. T. (1986). Principal component analysis. Chemometrics and Intelligent laboratory Systems, 2(1—3),
37-52.

KAUFMANN S. (2000). Second-order cohesion. Computational Intelligence, 16(4), 511-524.

LIN C.—Y. & HOVY E. (2003). Automatic evaluation of summaries using n—gram co-occurrence statistics.
Proceedings of Human language Technology Conference.

LYON C., MALCOLM J . & DICKERSON B. (2001). Detecting short passages of similar text in large document
collections. In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, p.
1 18-125.

MANNING C. D. & SCHUTZE H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, volume 26.
MIT Press.

MIHALCEA R. & CORLEY C. (2006). Corpus-based and knowledge—based measures of text semantic similarity.
In AAAI 06, p. 775-780.

MILLER G. A., BECKWITH R., FELLBAUM C., GROSS D. & MILLER K. (1990). Wordnet : An on—line lexical
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235-244.

MOHLER M. & MIHALCEA R. (2009). Text—to—text semantic similarity for automatic short answer grading.
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on EACL 09, (April), 567-575.

NELKEN R. & SHIEBER S. M. (2006). Towards robust context—sensitive sentence alignment for monolingual
corpora. In I I th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
SALTON G., WONG A. & YANG C. S. (1975). A vector space model for automatic indexing. Communications
ofthe ACM, 18(11), 613-620.

SCHUTZE H. (1998). Automatic word sense discrimination. Journal of Computational Linguistics, 24, 97-123.
WONG S. K. M., ZIARKO W., RAGHAVAN V. V. & WONG P. C. N. (1987). On modeling of information
retrieval concepts in vector spaces. ACM Transactions on Database Systems TODS, 12(2), 299-321.

