Conférence TALN 2000, Lausanne, 16-18 octobre 2000
The Aspectual Type B EGIN

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler

Computer Science Department, Concordia University, 1455 de Maisonnauve blvd. W,
Montreal (Quebec), Canada, H3G 1M8, e-mail: fdamova,berglerg@cs.concordia.ca
Abstract
This paper deals with the notion of aspect as it is understood in the eventuality structure based
formal approaches to aspect. These approaches typically link aspect to the interpretation of the
philosophical and ontological notion of event, seen as a conceptual entity with rigid edges: be-
ginning, protraction and end, and analyse and study extensively the end part of events ((Vendler,
1967),(Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Smith, 1991), (Pustejovsky, 1991), (Krifka, 1989), (Partee,
1984), (Hinrichs, 1986), etc.). The beginning, a semantic counterpart of the culmination on the
other hand, has not been discussed so much at large. We analyse various language means that
convey beginning and argue for the need of a mechanism to provide a uniform interpretation for
them. We define the aspectual type BEGIN, and develop its semantic representation along the
general lines of accounts of temporal reference of Discourse Representation Theory ((Kamp,
1979); (Kamp & Reyle, 1993)). We extend the DRT analysis of tense and aspect in postulating
a three layered formal representation for aspect. The aspectual type BEGIN introduces a DRS
aspectual operator, instead of a temporal discourse referent. We embed its explicit event struc-
ture into the operator’s definition, by adopting Pustejovsky’s formalisation (Pustejovsky, 1995).
We show that the proposed approach represents the aspectual type BEGIN correctly across cate-
gories, that is, it works on all relevant levels: lexical semantics, grammatical devices, secondary
predication, discourse, and it covers the semantics of BEGIN in a uniform way.
1. Introduction
Consistent and comprehensive formalisation of language phenomena is an important part in
the building of natural language processing systems, based on logical approaches. Tense and as-
pect are the language phenomena which convey information about temporal reference in texts,
and establish the temporal cohesive links between sentences. Singling out events in sequences
of sentences is essential for the proper representation of the temporal structure of texts. The
governing principles of the temporal reference postulate that events push the narrative time for-
ward, whereas states do not ((Partee, 1984), (Hinrichs, 1986), (Kamp, 1979), (Kamp & Rohrer,
1988), (Kamp & Reyle, 1993), (Sandstr̈om, 1993), (Eberle, 1991), etc.). Determining whether
an event or a state is described by the analysed language expressions depends on the onto-
logical properties of the states of affairs or eventualities ((Bach, 1986), (Moens & Steedman,
1988), (Kamp & Reyle, 1993), etc.) they reflect. States of affairs or eventualities are typically

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
classified according to the intrinsic temporal parameters - temporal extendedness and termi-
nal point - characterising them ((Vendler, 1967), (Bach, 1986), (Pustejovsky, 1991), (Krifka,
1989), (Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Smith, 1991)): (i) eventualities can be punctual as de-
scribed by the verb to die or to knock and protracted as described by the verbs to run or to work;
(ii) eventualities can be telic as in the expression write a letter or atelic as in the expression
walk in the park. These parameters pertaining to the internal temporal profile of the eventuali-
ties described by language expressions are referred to in the literature as aspectual, and aspect
is represented in terms of ontological schemes of event structure with components: protraction,
culmination, consecutive state.
The temporal reference properties of language expressions in the approaches we consider in
the present paper depend on whether they describe an event or a state ((Partee, 1984), (Hin-
richs, 1986), (Kamp, 1979), (Kamp & Rohrer, 1988), (Kamp & Reyle, 1993), (Sandstr̈om,
1993), (Eberle, 1991), etc.), e.g. on the ontological profile of the eventualities described. For
example, in (Partee, 1984), (Hinrichs, 1986), (Moens & Steedman, 1988) atelic eventualities
are considered as states, and telic eventualities with attained culmination are considered as
events because of the different temporal relations of respectively overlap or sequence they es-
tablish with the current temporal referent. Especially in compositional frameworks ((Dowty,
1981), (Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Krifka, 1989), (Pustejovsky, 1991), (Smith, 1991)) evi-
dence from English has shown that not only the ontological structure of single lexical items,
but also their combination with tenses and types of arguments play distinguished roles in deter-
mining the ontological type of the eventuality described, and hence the temporal relations that
could be invoked in discourse. Studies on tense and aspect usually focus on the end, the ter-
minal point of the eventuality or event structure ((Vendler, 1967), (Bach, 1986), (Pustejovsky,
1991), (Krifka, 1989), (Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Smith, 1991)) because of the semantic,
causal effects and different entailments triggered by attaining the culmination point. On the
other hand, the beginning, an obvious, semantic counterpart of the culmination has been ac-
knowledged, but not discussed much and at large in the literature. The analysis of its prototypi-
cal lexicalization - the verb begin, is mentioned in connection with discussions on the semantics
of aspectual verbs in the framework of formal semantics (Dowty, 1981), and in a thorough
theoretical syntax-semantics account on aspect (terMeulen, 1995). The aspectual composition
model of (White, 1994) includes the component “beginning!protraction” into the ontological
scheme of event structures encoded in a temporal reasoning system as discussed in (Steedman,
1997).
This paper explores a variety of language means that convey “beginning” and argues for the
necessity of establishing means to account for them in a uniform way. We define ASPECTUAL
TYPES to denote distinct parts of the internal temporal structure of eventualities. The aspectual
type BEGIN in particular pertains to the initial part of a protracted eventuality and can be en-
tailed in different ways. The verb begin is the prototypical case. Its complement can be realized
by a verb form as in “John began reading(verb form) a book”, or implicitly through associating
an event incorporated into the lexical semantics of a noun (Pustejovsky, 1991) as in “John began
[verb form e] a book”. The verbs commence, initiate, start, try, attempt also entail the aspectual
type BEGIN. Other language means like the syntactic structures, phrasal constructs, discourse
relations, grammatical devices also entail the aspectual type BEGIN. We develop the semantic
representation and the semantic construction of the aspectual type BEGIN within the framework
of Discourse Representation Theory (Kamp & Reyle, 1993). We show that this approach rep-
resents aspectual type correctly, across categories, that is, it works on different levels - lexical
semantic, grammatical, secondary predication, etc. We propose a semantic representation of

The Aspectual Type B EGIN
BEGIN      that accounts uniformly for all these linguistic devices.
2. Lexicalization of the Aspectual Type BEGIN
English verbs like begin, start, cease, resume, end, stop are called aspectual (Dowty, 1981)
because of their lexical semantics. They pertain to the temporal structure of the eventuality
described by its syntactic complement. Depending on their lexical semantics, they select for
particular eventuality types for their complements. The complement of begin has to be a pro-
tracted eventuality - a process, or a state1 . Examples (1) and (2) show this:

(1)      Meanwhile, Northrop’s own board began inquiring(process) about what happened to the hotel – the
Seoul Palace, it was to be called – and the $6,250,000. It was at that point, the filing alleges, that
a cover-up(process) began.
(WSJ 89-10-27)
(2)      There had been times, lately, when he had begun to wonder(state) whether he was entirely suited
to the career in which he had been launched some fifteen years earlier, not so much by personal
choice as by the mere impetus of his remarkable First.
(David Lodge, Changing Places)
The verb begin is a special marker in the process of temporal reference resolution in texts.
As it is the case with any full verb, its tensed forms keep the cohesiveness of discourse by intro-
ducing temporal referents which can be anaphorically referred back to or anchor the temporal
reference point. On the other hand, its semantics affects the temporal structure of its com-
plement. This role of the aspectual verb begin is semantically “auxiliary” in the way English
tenses and the progressive are. It refers to a specific phase of the eventuality described by its
complement, and is naturally interpreted as a part of the eventuality described by their comple-
ment. This is the way it is interpreted in the compositional accounts referred to earlier in our
discussion.
But, the lexical semantics of begin, referring to the initial point of a protracted eventuality,
has particular consequences for the semantics of single clauses and discourse that have not been
accounted for. We consider some of them.
The occurrence of begin in a sentence plays the role of a disambiguation factor for the even-
tuality type of its syntactic complement. For example, punctual eventualities - points or achieve-
ments - typically have two possible interpretations. They either describe the single occurrence
of the punctual eventuality or the process of repeated (habitual) occurrences of the punctual
eventuality. For example, the verbs kick, sneeze, win, see, spot are classified as points, but if
particular context is in place they are interpreted as processes, e.g. their eventuality type is
coerced into another, compatible one ((Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Pustejovsky, 1995), etc.).
When begin combines in a sentence with a verb describing an instantaneous situation like kick,
sneeze, win, see, spot, it enforces the type coercion of their prototypical classification as points
into protracted processes, and excludes their punctual episodic reading. The sentence in ex-
ample 3(a) describes the beginning of a process of repeated kicking, and the sentence in exam-
ple 3(b) describes the beginning of the state of being aware, as see here must be interpreted in
its metaphorical meaning of understand.
1 In  the terminology of (Moens & Steedman, 1988), (Kamp & Reyle, 1993), (Smith, 1991), (Vendler,
1967), (Bach, 1986), (Partee, 1984), (Eberle, 1992), etc.

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
(3)   a.    John began kicking the ball.
b.    John began to see the point of that argument.

This is due to the inferential effects of the lexical semantics of begin. The aspectual verb
begin in 3(a) and 3(b) predictably enforces the coercion of a punctual complement verb into a
process. Thus, we see it as: (i) an independent lexical unit with appropriate characteristics - an
eventuality with internal temporal structure (aktionsart class (Vendler, 1967)), as any other verb;
grammatical paradigm (tenses, progressive forms); and (ii) a semantically integral part of the
eventuality described by its complement - formally it can be regarded as part of the eventuality
described by its complement. Thus, the functional role of the verb begin requires particular
representation, since it has to be made technically accessible as an independent semantic item.
It also has to be considered as part of the eventuality described by its complement. We argue
that in order to be able to capture and correctly represent the role of begin in texts, we are in
need of two theoretical notions: one to account for its semantic function and one to account for
its discourse representation function.
Generally, the syntactic role of begin as a main verb implies its role as a carrier of the tense
marking and of the information which establishes the temporal cohesive links with the sur-
rounding discourse. Example (4) shows that the referent introduced by the tensed verb begin
temporally connects with the rest of the discourse. The when-clause of (4) is temporally located
with respect to the beginning and not to the letter writing, described by the main clause itself,
which arguably may never have proceeded any further.

(4)   John began to write a letter to Mary when he received this message from her.

On the other hand, example (5) illustrates that in some cases not the beginning, but the initiated
process is anaphorically referred to in subsequent sentences. The eventuality described by the
second sentence of (5), in fact, refers anaphorically back to the process described by the com-
plement verb, and not to its beginning. Begin here initiates the flow of narrative time (Webber,
1988).

(5)   John began to write a letter to Mary last night. He finished it by 2:00 am.

Some cases of temporal reference involving the verb begin are ambiguous. The pronoun it of
the second sentences of examples 6(a)-(d) could be interpreted as referring back either to the
beginning, described by the verb begin or to the initiated processes, described by the comple-
ment verbs diet, walk, kick, and win. This ambiguity does not have to be resolved if it does not
impact subsequent interpretation, but it is not difficult to add the appropriate context which will
prove the necessity of having a way to keep these two possible interpretations separate.

(6)   a.    John began dieting. I saw it on his pants.
b.    John began to give his talk. I saw it on TV.
c.    The baby began to walk. His mother was very excited because she saw it.
d.    John began to win in his chess club. His friends could not believe it.

So, the first sentences of (5) and 6(a)-(d) contain two eventualities each: (i) the start, which
is described by the syntactically governing, and semantically auxiliary verb begin, and (ii) the

The Aspectual Type B EGIN
complement process, which is described by the syntactically subordinated, yet semantically
topical eventuality. Both can be referred to anaphorically by subsequent sentences.
The role of the aspectual type BEGIN and its prototypical lexicalization the aspectual verb
begin in embedded discourse gives another reason to look more precisely at their semantics.
The inferential context triggered by the lexical meaning of the aspectual verb begin even al-
lows for the construction of a well-formed embedded discourse, where pronoun and anaphoric
antecedent are separated by several sentences, and provides relevant information for correctly
resolving the established anaphoric links. For example, the pronoun it in the last sentence of
discourse (7) refers back to the process of singing, described in the complement of the verb
begin in its first sentence.

(7)   John began singingi . He was in a good mood. He had spent a marvelous week end. He went
to that famous island. The weather was nice, his company bearable, the atmosphere relaxing.
Unfortunately, he was off key. He had never had an ear for music. “Stop iti !” someone shouted.

So, the discourse referent introduced by the process of singing has to remain accessible for
later reference. This evidence shows that in order to be able to build the formal structure of
discourses containing the verb begin or aspectual verbs in general, we have to provide means
to make both the eventuality described by the verb begin and the eventuality described by its
complement accessible for anaphoric reference.
A further reason to search for representing the aspectual verb begin and its complement
separately is the fact that begin may occur in the progressive, which itself has aspectual meaning.
The sentences in 8(a)-(c) with the verb begin in progressive convey situations in which the
beginning of the process at stake is described as coming about.

(8)   a.   He was beginning to play soccer.
b.   He was beginning to learn Spanish.
c.   He was finally beginning to build a house.

Furthermore, the progressive of the verb begin conveys the expected temporal relation of over-
lap with the eventuality described by an adjacent clause. For example, the when clauses of
sentences 9(a)-(b) describe eventualities which overlap with the intended beginning and not
with the process of the complement verb.

(9)   a.   John was beginning to run, when the rain started.
b.   He was beginning to paint the walls in his kitchen, when the doorbell rang.

Thus, on the one hand, begin signals the starting point of the process described by its comple-
ment, on the other hand the progressive modifies the situation referred to with begin as immi-
nent. This phenomenon has obviously a semantic effect and communicational value which need
to be accounted for.
We claim that the semantic dichotomy exhibited by the aspectual verb begin requires more
than one theoretical notion, e.g. it is necessary to make explicit on the one hand the relation
of the verb begin to the eventuality described by its complement verb, and on the other hand
its functional role in texts as provider of cohesive and inferential information (through tense,
progressive, lexical semantics, etc.).

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
3. Language Devices Incorporating the Aspectual Type BEGIN
The aspectual verb begin is not the only way of conveying the aspectual type BEGIN. There
are other lexical and periphrastic language devices in English with the same semantic effect.
We are going to mention the most prominent ones.
Intentional predicates like try and attempt also carry in their semantics a parameter which
evokes the aspectual type BEGIN. This can be seen in the extended contexts of examples 10(a)-
(c).

(10) a.    John attempted to reach the station on time, but traffic did not let him.
b.   John attempted to read the book on time, but that accident had caught his attention for a
while.
c.   John attempted to go to the movie theatre, but he met his old friend Jack on the way.

Each second sentence in 10(a)-(c) gives a reason why the result, e.g. the taking place of the
eventuality of the intentional predicate’s complement, could not be realized. We associate this
argument with the argument Landman (Landman, 1992) raises in his paper on the progressive.
In it he gives a formal account for the progressive in a neodavidsonian framework by intro-
ducing the notion of partial event and describing the progressive as conveying partial events.
The notion of partial event accommodates very conveniently the interpretation of intentional
predicates such as try and attempt, whose semantics is analysed as close to the semantics of the
English progressive. On the other hand they can be interpreted as containing in their semantics
a presupposition of the aspectual type BEGIN.
Sentences with achievement verbs in simple past typically describe resultative situations.
There exist however some regular syntactic alterations which modify the semantic effect of
achievements. Such an alteration is the attachment of prepositional phrase with the preposition
at as second argument of normally transitive verbs (Levin, 1993). Thus, while the sentence
in 11(a) describes at least one event of stabbing, where the knife has penetrated the ham, sen-
tence 11(b) describes a situation where the stabbing of the ham may not actually have taken
place, but has at least been initiated, e.g. repeated attempts have been made to stab the ham.
This alteration of transforming a transitive achievement describing verb into an intransitive ac-
tivity describing verb is known in the literature as inchoative (Levin, 1993). The semantics of
the verb stab at is thus close to the semantic effect of the aspectual verb begin in 11(c), which
also describes an initiated process, where penetration of the knife may or may not occur.

(11) a.    John stabbed the ham with a knife.
b.   John stabbed at the frozen ham with a knife.
c.   John began stabbing the ham with a knife.

These examples show that different syntactic patterns lead to the same semantic interpretation,
referring to the aspectual type BEGIN.
Not only verbs or verb alterations have as part of their semantics the meaning of the aspectual
type BEGIN. The combination of the meanings of some adverbials with the meaning of some
verbs triggers the same semantic effect. It can only be recognised after the entire sentence is
processed. An example of this kind of phenomenon is the combination of punctual adverbial

The Aspectual Type B EGIN
modifiers and process describing predicates of verbs in simple past. The sentences in 12(a)-(c)
trigger inchoative context, which in our approach corresponds to the aspectual type BEGIN. Its
interpretation is semantically identical with the interpretation of the verb begin combined with
its complement.

(12) a.     Suddenly John knew the answer.
b.    John sang at once.
c.    John began to know the answer.
Only a special semantic construction rule is necessary to ensure the correct semantic represen-
tation.
4. Representation of the Aspectual Type BEGIN
We develop the semantic representation of the aspectual type BEGIN along the general lines
of accounts of temporal reference of Discourse Representation Theory ((Kamp, 1979); (Kamp
& Reyle, 1993)). We extend the DRT analysis of tense and aspect in postulating a three layered
formal representation for aspect, which gives a unified account to cope with single expressions
and entire texts. The aspectual type BEGIN introduces a DRS aspectual operator, instead of a
temporal discourse referent. Its meaning is described in a meaning postulate, and does not ap-
pear in the DRS of the processed discourse. This captures one of the semantic features of BEGIN,
namely the function of modifier of its complement eventuality. In order to adequately represent
this modification, we embed the explicit event structure account of Pustejovsky (Pustejovsky,
1995) into the operator’s definition, e.g. its meaning postulate. The DRT discourse referents
event and state remain operative in the DRS. We adopt their definitions in order to represent the
discourse semantics effects of aspect and the aspectual type BEGIN. We show that the proposed
approach represents the aspectual type BEGIN correctly across categories, that is, it works on
the levels of lexical semantics, grammatical devices, secondary predication, discourse, etc., and
it covers the semantics of BEGIN in a uniform way.

4.1. Discourse Representation Theory

Discourse Representation Theory ((Kamp, 1979); (Kamp & Reyle, 1993)) considers the fact
that it is in general not possible to represent the truth conditions of a text as a simple conjunction
of the truth conditions of the sentences of which it consists, because many sentences contain
anaphoric elements which connect them semantically to earlier sentences in the text. Such
phenomena, pertaining to temporal and nominal anaphora in discourse, can only be properly
analysed by using a model of discourse, in which the cohesive links between the elements of
the consequent sentences are made explicit. Thus, DRT combines a definition of truth with a
systematic account of semantic representation. The analysis of a sequence of clauses proceeds
in two steps: (i) after a syntactic analysis of language input, discourse representation rules are
applied which map the sequence onto a discourse representation structure, (ii) the discourse
representation is given a truth-conditional interpretation relative to a model of the world (and
the individual sentences are not truth-conditionally interpreted directly). Formally this means
that in a model which represents the “real world” as it develops through time, the sequence of
sentences taken in its entirety is true at the time they were uttered. The formal mechanism to
handle the increasing information conveyed by each successive sentence in discourse are the

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
Discourse Representation Structures (DRSs), which provide a bridge between the linguistic ex-
pressions and the truth model of discourse. DRSs are designed to describe the informational
content of texts. They consist of two components, forming a logically connected pair <U,C>
of: (i) a set of discourse referents <U> - the universe of the DRS, (ii) a set of DRS-conditions
or formulas <C>, in which predicates are combined with chosen discourse referents to encode
which individuals satisfy which predicates in the DRS-conditions, describing in logical con-
junctions the ways in which the discourse referents relate to each other. DRS operators with
explicit semantics given in meaning postulates, extend the representational potential of DRT by
allowing to have accessible further semantic information.
Central in Kamp’s theory of temporal reference (Kamp, 1979) is the transformation of event
structure into instant structures. This representation involves a contraction of what are in phys-
ical terms protracted happenings to indivisible temporal units, which DRT defines as events.
For example, something may emerge as an instant in the instant structure induced by the dis-
course representations, but from a common sense physical or ontological point of view it may
be temporally extended. The interpretation of such an example leads to temporally ordered
structures in which “events” do play the role of instants. The time model of DRT defines a
partially ordered structure of instants such that for each of the events there is a certain set of
instants at each of which the event is ”ongoing” (Kamp, 1979). The temporal relations evoked
in such constructions are the one of complete precedence, holding between events and the one
of temporal overlap involving states.
While this theory provides a straightforward account for handling the temporal relations
in texts, it does not ensure smooth use of inferencing information with respect to the internal
ontological profile of eventualities.. On the other hand, the examples we discussed so far showed
the need of a formal representation of event structure which will allow to have explicit access
to the different components of the basic ontological eventuality profiles like accomplishments,
achievements and the like. Such a formal account is developed by Pustejovsky in ((Pustejovsky,
1991), (Pustejovsky, 1995)).
4.2. Pustejovsky's event structure
Pustejovsky’s (Pustejovsky, 1991) syntax of event structure is based on the idea of creating a
method for a structured representation of lexical and compositional semantics information rely-
ing on the belief that word meaning is highly structured. In this one level of semantic description
involves an event-based interpretation of words or phrases, e.g. their event structure. Event or
“event-type” in Pustejovsky’s view describes the properties of certain lexical items, phrases or
sentences with respect to their internal ontological temporal structure. Their event structures
are configurations where events (or rather subevents) are not only ordered by temporal prece-
dence, but also by relative prominence to cope with the event structures in a generative way.
Relative prominence provides a way of indicating a type of foregrounding and backgrounding
of event arguments and is referred to with the notion of event headedness. Instead of describing
them through collection of feature attribute values, Pustejovsky elaborates a unified structural
description of the ontological types of activities, accomplishments, achievements, states, gen-
eralizing them into a single notion of event. Three components characterize any given event
structure: 1) the primitive event type of the lexical item, 2) the rules of event composition, 3)
the mapping rules to lexical structure. Three basic event types (E, where E is a variable for
any event type) are defined: (i) states (S), single events which are evaluated relative to no other
event, (ii) processes (P), sequences of events of the same semantic expression with structural

The Aspectual Type B EGIN
representation, and (iii) transitions (T), events identifying a semantic expression, which is eval-
uated relative to its opposition with structural representation. Headedness is a property of all
event sorts, but acts to distinguish the set of transitions, specifying what part of the core event
is being referred to by the language expression. The head is thus defined as the most prominent
subevent in the event structure of a predicate. Thus, the head of an event, denoted with , for
example e , marks the part of the event structure which is available for further reference.
So, Pustejovsky’s approach provides the rich event structure formalization within a gener-
ative framework, and connects it with surface language expressions, but it does not have the
formal means to handle the temporal structure of discourse, which DRT has.
Our discussion showed that in order to have a full unified account for the semantic role of the
aspectual type BEGIN at a lexical, phrasal and discourse levels we cannot just adopt one of the
two outlined theories, because they give powerful solutions for specific levels of interpretation.
We find that developing a hybrid framework by combining these two approaches would bring
the necessary expressiveness to meet the specifics of the empirical evidence outlined in our
analysis.

4.3. Proposal
Our proposal to represent the aspectual type BEGIN introduces new parameterized ways of
modifying DRS temporal referents, events and states which result in the definition of new as-
pectual operators with new meaning postulates.
Like the semantically related progressive, the aspectual type BEGIN introduces a DRS aspec-
tual operator, instead of a temporal discourse referent. Its meaning is described in a meaning
postulate, and will not appear in the DRS of the processed discourse. This captures the role of
BEGIN as a modifier of its complement eventuality. In order to adequately represent this modi-
fication, we embed the explicit event structure account of Pustejovsky (Pustejovsky, 1991) into
the operator’s definition, e.g. meaning postulate. The DRT discourse referents event and state
remain operative in the DRS, and provide the mechanisms to cope with the temporal relations
in discourse. To capture the second semantic component of BEGIN and to make explicit its re-
latedness to the eventuality described by its complement, we introduce an eventuality discourse
referent , associating the entity described with its internal temporal profile point, process, cul-
minated process, culmination, state, habitual state, which can be regarded a place holder of the
complement verb and permits access to its semantics2 .
The DRS 13(b) of sentence 13(a) contains the condition : READ(m,c) , and the event e
derived from the application of the BEG operator to . The meaning postulate BEG is given in
13(c). It describes an event e (the beginning), denoting the start of , the eventuality described
by the complement verb. The meaning postulate makes this explicit by stating the temporal
relation of immediate precedence (s1         e      s2) between a state s1 prior to the state of
existence of the eventuality , s2. The ontological type of the eventuality is further specified
by structural representation - which follows the generative lexicon definitions of event types.
Thus, the meaning postulate of the newly introduced DRS operator BEG correctly represents
the intuition that while the culmination is intuitively a transition from an eventuality to its
abrogation, inchoatives represent transitions from the abrogation of to its taking place, or
2A  different evidence of grammatical aspect from other languages including Bulgarian, and independent moti-
vation for the use of two event notions: textual event and ontological eventuality type in the DRS construction is
given in (Damova, 1999) and (Damova, 2000).

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
obtaining. A similar idea to interpret the meaning of the verb begin as a separate event marking
the beginning of a process, rather than as a part of this process, is advanced by Alice ter Meulen
in (terMeulen, 1995) where she includes it into a different representational framework, favoring
a lexical semantics approach.
(13) a.    Maria began to read the book.
enmc
book(c)
Maria(m)
b.          e<n
e: BEG
: READ(m,c)

c.   Meaning Postulate for BEG:
s1 t s2
e       t
s1           e           s2
BEG( ) )                s1:     :
T
s2:        :
P
HS

Thus, our notion of ontological eventuality associates the entity described with its internal
temporal profile - point, process, culminated process, culmination, state, habitual state. The
operator BEG is defined as taking an argument , explicitly entered as a discourse referent for
the ontological eventuality of the complement. The meaning postulate captures the temporal
semantics that did not obtain before the point in time associated with the event invoked by
BEG but holds after. Moreover, the aspectual type of BEG’s argument is represented in the
process reading of Pustejovky’s transition event type by the head feature , making thus explicit
the correct intuition that the complement of the aspectual type BEGIN must be a process.
The combination of the meaning postulate and the actual DRS makes explicit the entire range
of temporal information contained in this sentence. This way of approaching the representation
and the interpretation of aspectual predicates mirrors the semantic role of the aspectual types,
and the syntactic function of aspectual verbs in discourse. It allows us to represent the temporal
structure of the processed discourse and to preserve and be able to trace the additional infor-
mation conveyed by the aspectual predicate. This mechanism quite appropriately mirrors the
natural role of aspectual verbs in discourse, and provides further advantages.
Thus, the proposed approach allows us to represent accumulated aspectual markers in a plau-
sible way. For example, this method can correctly represent a sentence with begin in progressive
simply by applying the PROG operator (Kamp & Reyle, 1993) to the eventuality derived by the
BEG operator. The sentence in 14(a), which has the verb begin in past progressive will trigger
DRS 14(b).
(14) a.    Maria was beginning to read the book.

The Aspectual Type B EGIN
snmc
book(c)
Maria(m)
s<n
b.                       0

s:           0:
PROG         BEG

: READ(m,c)
Here both and s will be accessible, which is what is needed. The eventuality of the com-
plement of begin is introduced into the DRS by the discourse referent . The argument of
the discourse referent triggerred by the progressive form of begin outlines explicitly in a DRS-
condition the nature of the state s.
5. Conclusion
We discussed and analysed various language means that convey beginning, a semantic coun-
terpart to the culmination, in eventuality structure based formal approaches to aspect. We argued
that a mechanism is needed to provide a uniform interpretation of their semantics. We defined
the aspectual type BEGIN, and developed its semantic representation along the general lines of
accounts of temporal reference of Discourse Representation Theory ((Kamp, 1979); (Kamp &
Reyle, 1993)). We extended the DRT analysis of tense and aspect in postulating a three layered
formal representation for aspect, which gives a unified account to cope with single expressions
and entire texts. The aspectual type BEGIN introduced a DRS aspectual operator, instead of a
temporal discourse referent. Its meaning was described in a meaning postulate, and remained
hidden but accessible for the DRS of the processed discourse. We embeded its explicit event
structure and inferential properties into the operator’s definition, e.g. its meaning postulate,
by adopting Pustejovsky’s formalisation (Pustejovsky, 1995). We showed that the proposed
approach represents the aspectual type BEGIN correctly across categories, that is, it works on
all discussed levels: lexical semantics, grammatical devices, secondary predication, discourse.
Thus, we demonstrated the convenience of adopting a method combining two powerful formal
frameworks to achieve the required result.
References
BACH E. (1986). The algebra of events. Linguistics and Philosophy, 9(1).
DAMOVA M. (1999). Tense and Aspect in Discourse: A Study of the interaction between aspect, dis-
course relations and temporal reference within DRT with special attention to Bulgarian. Sofia: FDC
Publishing Agency.
DAMOVA M. (2000). The notion of aspect and the bulgarian wid within discourse representation theory.
In L. H. ILA D IMITROVA -V YLCHANOVA , I LIYANA K RAPOVA, Ed., Papers from Third Conference on
Formal Approaches to South Slavic and Balkan Languages. Plovdiv, September 1999., number 34 in
Working Papers in Linguistics, p. 262–275, Dragvoll: University of Trondheim.
D OWTY D. R. (1981). Word meaning and Montague Grammar. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
E BERLE K. (1991). LiLoG, chapter On Representing the Temporal Structure of Texts, p. 313–341.
Springer Verlag.

Mariana Damova and Sabine Bergler
E BERLE K. (1992). On representing the temporal structure of a natural language text. In Proceedings
Coling’92, p. 288–294.
H INRICHS E. (1986). Temporal anaphora in discourses of english. Linguistics and Philosophy, 9(1),
63–82.
K AMP H. (1979). Semantics from Different Points of View, chapter Events, Instants and Temporal Ref-
erence. Springer-Verlag.
K AMP H. & R EYLE U. (1993). From Discourse to Logic. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
K AMP H. & ROHRER C. (1988). Temporal reference in french. Manuscript, IMS, University of
Stuttgart.
K RIFKA M. (1989). Nominalreferenz, zeitkonstitution, aspekt, aktionsart: Eine semantische erkl̈arung
ihrer interaktion. Manuscript, Universiẗat T̈ubingen.
L ANDMAN F. (1992). The progressive. Natural Language Semantics.
L EVIN B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations. The University of Chicago Press.
M OENS M. & S TEEDMAN M. (1988). Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational
Linguistics.
PARTEE B. (1984). Nominal and temporal anaphora. Linguistics and Philosophy, 7, 243–286.
P USTEJOVSKY J. (1991). The syntax of event structure. Cognition, 41, 47–81.
P USTEJOVSKY J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon. MIT Press.
S ANDSTR OM̈ G. (1993). When-clauses and the Temporal Interpretation of Narrative Discourse. PhD
thesis, Dept. of Linguistics, University of Umea.
S MITH C. (1991). The Parameter of Aspect. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
S TEEDMAN M. (1997). Temporality. In J. VAN B ENTHEM & A. TER M EULEN, Eds., Handbook of
Logic and Language, p. 179–239. The MIT Press and North Holland.
TER M EULEN   A. G. (1995). Representing Time in Natural Language. MIT Press.
V ENDLER Z. (1967). Verbs and times. In Linguistics and Philosophy. Cornell University Press.
W EBBER B. (1988). Tense and discourse anaphora. Computational Linguistics, 14(2), 61–73.
W HITE M. (1994). A compositional approach to aspectual composition. PhD thesis, University of
Pennsilvania, Philadelphia.
