Sentence Generation: Input, Algorithms and Applications

Claire Gardent

CNRS/LORIA, Nancy (France)

Abstract
(Joint work with Paul Bedaride, Eric Kow, Shashi Narayan and Laura Perez-Beltrachini)

Sentence Generation maps abstract linguistic representations into sentences. A necessary part of any natural
language generation system, sentence generation has also recently received increasing attention in applications
such as transfer based machine translation (of. the LOGON project) and natural language interfaces to knowledge
bases (e. g., to verbalise, to author and/or to query ontologies).

One outstanding issue in Sentence Generation is what it starts from. What is the abstract linguistic representation
it generates from? In my talk, I will explore sentence generation from two main input formats (ﬂat semantic
formulae and dependency structures) and discuss their impact on efficiency, algorithms and applications.

I will start by describing an algorithm that generates from ﬂat semantic formulae, explain why it is
computationally intractable and presenting ways of optimising it to make it usable in practice. I will then show
how this algorithm can be used to generate paraphrases; to support error mining and to generate teaching material
for language learners from an ontology.

In the second part of the talk, I will focus on generation from dependency structures. Based on the input data
recently made available by the Generation Challenges Surface Realisation Shared Task, 1 will show how the
algorithm previously used to generate from ﬂat semantic formulae can be adapted to generate from dependency
structures. 1 will moreover discuss various issues raised by the GenChal data such as, missing lexical entries and
mismatches between dependency and grammar structures.

Bio of Claire Gardent

Claire Gardent is a senior researcher at the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). She
graduated in linguistics at the University of Toulouse in 1986, received an MSc in Artiﬁcial Intelligence from the
University of Essex in 1987 and defended a PhD in Cognitive Science at the University of Edinburgh in 1991.
From 1991 to 2000, she worked as a reseacher at the Universities of Utrecht and Amsterdam (The Netherlands),
Clerrnont-Ferrand and Sarrebruecken (Germany). Since 2001 she has been working for the CNRS at the Lorraine
Laboratory for Research in Computer Science (LORIA) in Nancy, France.

Claire Gardent's research focuses on the computational treatment of natural language meaning. She has worked
on the automatic acquisition of lexical resources for French, on syntactic parsing and semantic role labelling and
on text generation. Recently, she has become interested in in exploring the interaction between virtual worlds and
natural language processing.

Claire Gardent has published a textbook on analysis and generation (with Karine Baschung) and about 100
articles in journals and conference proceedings. She has been nominated Chair of the European Chapter for the
Association of Computational Linguistics (EACL), editor in chief of the french journal "Traitement Automatique
des Langues" and member of the editorial board of the journals "Computational Linguistics", "Journal of
Semantics". Each year she is on the programme committee of half a dozen international conferences or
workshops, she also acted as scientiﬁc chair for various international conferences (EACL), workshops (TAG+,
ENLG, DIALOR, SIGDIAL) and summer schools (ES SLL1).
