
Aggregation by Conﬂation of Quasi-Synonymous Units
in Author Abstracting

Choy-Kim CHUAH

School of Computer Science
Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang, Malaysia
kimc@cs.usm.my

Département de linguistique et de traduction
Université de Montreal
Montreal (Quebec) H3C 3J7, Canada
choy.kim.chuah@umontreal.ca

Résumé — Abstract

La plupart du temps, les études qui portent sur l’aggrégation des phrases en génération de
texte, se focalisent sur l’utilisation des connecteurs pour relier les phrases courtes et
inventées. Mais, les connecteurs limitent le nombre des unités qu'il est possible de combiner a
la fois. Comment condenser l’information en peu d'unités, sans utiliser trop de connecteurs ?
Cette étude porte sur des documents ayant trait a la biologie et discute de l'agrégation des
phrases par les auteurs quand ils résument. Cet article présente aussi quelques préalables et
difficultés pour un systeme de résumé automatique. Beaucoup de phrases sont aggrégées sans
signe explicite, ni connecteur, ni ponctuation.

In text generation, studies on aggregation often focus on the use of connectives to combine
short made-up sentences. But connectives restrict the number of units that may be combined
at any one time. So, how does information get condensed into fewer units without excessive
use of connectives? From a comparison of document and abstract, this reconnaissance study
reports on some preferred patterns in aggregation when authors write abstracts for journal
articles on biology. The paper also discusses some prerequisites and difficulties anticipated
for abstracting systems. More sentences were aggregated without than with the use of an
explicit sign, such as a connective or a (semi-)colon.

Mots-clés - Keywords

abstracting, sentence, aggregation, synonymy, conﬂation

1 Introduction and Motivation

Research on automatic abstracting has mainly stopped at content selectionl (see Kupiec et al.,
1995; Marcu, 1997; Barzilay & Elhadad, 1997). While there are notable contributions on

1 Summarization proper may be divided into two stages of content selection and content condensation.

Choy—Kim CH UAH

aggregation from text generation (see Dalianis, 1999; Shaw, 1998; Dalianis & Hovy, 1993),
the work is of little immediate benefit to summarization by sentence extraction. The simple
made-up sentences aggregated (see Dalianis, l999:386) do not reﬂect the complex state of
affairs in documents such as scientific and technical journal articles with urgent need for
abstracts2. If studies on summarization are to benefit real applications, then research must
reﬂect real contexts.

In the aforementioned studies, sentences are almost always aggregated with the use of
an explicit sign, a connective or a (semi-)colon. But explicit signs restrict the number of units
that may be combined at any one time. So, the question asked is how does information get
condensed and without excessive use of explicit signs as observed in scientific abstracts?

1.1 This study

This motivated the present study to investigate how authors combine segments of texts,
ultimately sentences, when abstracting scientific journal articles. This reconnaissance study
on abstracting reports on some preferred patterns in aggregation, and prerequisites and
difficulties that an abstracting system might face. The paper does not propose which pattern
or connective to use, both of which depends in part on what and how one wants to
communicate selected information. While Section 2 describes the study method, Section 3
gives some data on the distribution of number of full text (ft-) sentences used to write a
sentence in an abstract (ab-) and common patterns in abstracting. The paper ends with a
discussion and suggestions for future work.

1.2 Aggregation: A Deﬁnition

Dalianis & Hovy (1993:90), who worked on “removal of redundancy” during generation, say
that Mann & Moore (1980) were the first to use aggregation, although Paice (1981) was
reported (in Paice, l990:l75) to have coined the term to mean “the idea of adding adjacent
sentences”. To refer to this sub-process in the context of abstracting, the term with the
underlying meaning of ‘combining sentences’ will be retained, but with the stipulations of
“removal of redundancy”, and “adjacent” removed. Not only is deletion not necessarily
implicated3, but sentences aggregated need not be adjacent. For a survey of definitions for
aggregation, see Reape & Mellish (1999).

2 Method

Fifty-seven articles from two journals, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology (bes) and
Oecologia (oec) (Springer-Verlag Publications) were downloaded for the study. All articles
have the basic sections of Abstract (A), Introduction (1), Method (M), Results (R) and
Discussion (D). For identification purposes, all sentences in full text and abstract were given a
code which indicates its location in the document. For example, a sentence with location code
[R-2-1] is the first sentence in the second paragraph of the Results section. On the basis of
verbatim matches, similarity in stem and in meaning, a manual search was made for ft-
sentences that were probable sources of information for abstract4 (henceforth, selected ft-

2 Which is used here to refer to the special kind of summary in scientific and technical documents.

3 Consider the uivial example where no linguistic unit is deleted: The elephant is big + The mouse is small —>
The elephant is big, but the mouse is small.

4 The present author is a trained entomologist.

Aggregation by Conﬂation of Quasi-Synonymous Units in Author Abstracting

sentences). For some statistics on the corpus, see Table A1 in the Appendix. Examples
provided are in the following format:

(0) <ﬁ-sentence> [location code]
—> <ab-sentence > [location code; journal-year_volume_page]
REL(ft-LU) = ab-LU

3 Results

3.1 Ft-sentences in aggregation

3. 1. 1 Distribution

About 2/3 of ab-sentences in the study corpus were aggregated from multiple sentences: 37%
from two ft-sentences, while another 27% were constituted from three or more sentences,
which is an indication of the importance of multiple sentence aggregation in abstracting. For
about one-third of corpus, about half of the ft-sentences selected for abstracting came from
the Introduction section, none from the Method section (see Chuah, 2001 :59).

Table 1. Distribution of ft-sentences to construct an ab-sentence

Sub_corpus No. ft-sentence (%)
(no. ab-sentence) 1 2 3 2 4
besl (120) 43 (35.83) 48 (41.67) 20 (16.67) 9 ( 7.50)
bes2 (120) 43 (35.83) 48 (40.00) 14 (11.67) 15 (12.50)
oecl (136) 43 (31.62) 45 (33.09) 30 (22.06) 16 (11.77)
oec2 (158) 60 (37.97) 56 (35.44) 25 (24.05) 14 ( 8.86)
Corpus (534+) 189 (35.39) 197 89 (16.67) 54 (10.11)
(36.89)
+ Five ab-sentences did not have matches.
3.1.2 Source

As this is a preliminary study, and because of the complexity of the problem, we only looked
at the simplest case of two-sentence aggregation to determine the source of information. Are
they from the same section? Different sections? Most sentences aggregated were from the
same section with Introduction as the highest contributor, and Method, the lowest. When from
different sections, the sentences were likely to be from the Results and Discussion sections.

Table 2. Distribution of selected ft-sentences in two-ft-one-ab-sentence construction

_ Section

Sectlon Introduction Method Results Discussion
Introduction 57+(28.9)
Method 12 ( 6.1) 10 ( 5.1)
Results 5 ( 2.5) 9 (4.6) 31 (15.7)
Discussion 11( 5.6) 5 (2.5) 27 (13.7) 30 (15.2)

+ No. of sentences (percentage)

Eighteen percent of ab-sentences has its source in sentences that were immediately
adjacent. The implication for aggregation is that adjacent sentences are more likely to be on

Ch0y—Kim CH UAH

the same topic than sentences from different paragraphs/sections, and the anaphor probably
refers to an element mentioned in the preceding sentence.

3.2 Categorization of aggregation

Reape & Mellish (1999:23-25) proposed a four-category typology for aggregation.
Conceptual aggregation was distinguished from semantic and lexical aggregations. While the
latter two presumptively involve linguistic knowledge, the examples given do not appear to
be far different from that of conceptual aggregation which implicates world/domain.
However, on the basis of whether an explicit sign was used or not, we propose three
categories of aggregation. If the explicit sign is a connective or (semi-)colon, then
CONNECTIVE or (SEMI-)COLON respectively, and if no sign was used, then CONFLATION. In the
last category of CONFLATION, the basis of aggregation is knowledge, linguistic or
world/domain. Refer to Table 3 to see how our proposed categorization compares with that
by Reape & Mellish (1999). Each of these categories, C1-C3, is discussed below.

Table 3: Categorization proposed by present study vs. Typology of aggregations surveyed by Reape &
Mellish (1999)

Proposed category Reape & Mellish’s typology

Conceptual aggregation, e.g. peacock + hummingbird A bird

Semantic aggregation,

By conﬂation e.g. J is C’s sister + C is J’s brother A C and J are brother and sister

Lexical aggregation, e.g. Monday + ...Friday A weekdays

Referential aggregation, e.g. John is here + Jane is here A They are here

With connective Discourse aggregation, e.g. (see Reape & Mellish, l999:23)

Syntactic aggregation, e.g. John is here + Jane is here A John and Jane are here

With (semi-)colon -

3. 2. 1 By conﬂation

Seventy-five percent of two-sentence aggregations were the result of conﬂation (see text in
bold). Two semantically equivalent text units may be conﬂated by: (a) splicing and joining,
or (b) merging them. Units are merged on the basis of semantic similarity. Often one sentence
(Sx) is used as the main sentence.

C133 [X1Y]sx + [X2Z]sy—> [X2Y]s i ‘X1’ 5 ‘X255;

In (1), text unit small, early-instar bolas spiders was spliced off one sentence and joined to
text unit of both sexes attract moth ﬂies in the genus Psychoda in main sentence [I-3-6].

(1) Small, early-instar bolas spiders  . [I-3-1]
juvenile bolas spiders of both sexes attract adult male ﬂies in the genus Psychoda. [I-3-6]

A Small, early-instar bolas spiders of both sexes attract moth ﬂies in the genus Psychoda,
[A-1-5; oecl-97112572]

5 X, Y, Z are units of text, and ‘X’ = meaning of X.

Aggregation by Conﬂation of Quasi-Synonymous Units in Author Abstracting

Clb: [x1Y]s,. + [x2z]s,—> [XY]g I ‘xx + ‘X2’ E ‘X’;

In (2), sentences are aggregated when semantically equivalent text units were merged, before
being optionally followed by other condensation sub-processes, such as deletion ( )
and substitution.

recent study + ﬁeld studies A recent ﬁeld studies A preliminary ﬁeld observations

In both cases, units are aggregated without any explicit use of a connective, or a (semi-)colon.

(2) A recent study  revealed an unusually extended
reproductive period, which results in a very wide   size distribution of the
eeausti-ng juvenile instars. [I-6-2]
Fieldstudies . --  '-.     ' ..

[D-l-4]
A Preliminary field observations indicated an extended reproductive period, which results
in a very wide size distribution of juvenile instars. [A-l-3; besl-9945349]

Aggregations, however, are rarely as direct as (1) and (2). In (3), anaphor resolution is
required: species is the lexical anaphor for ants and spiders.

(3) Antsandspidersare -e -- -- .- =. .  .- - -  ' - - '
. [I-l-1]
Many species   can potentially compete with and prey upon
each other. [I-l-2]

A Spiders and ants are potential competitors and mutual predators.
[A-l-l; oec2-97109313]

In (4), experimental knowledge is first required to know that text unit C02 sensitivity
is a metonym for text unit sensory organs that are specialised to the detection of C02, before
a unit was selected. The selected unit was transformed finally to sensory organs that detect
C02 in the abstract. Note the simultaneous occurrence of other condensation processes,
namely substitution with a less technical term: moths and butterﬂies A Lepidoptera, and
compression into fewer words: functional role A function.

(4)  , sensory organs that are specialised to the detection of CO2 ﬁnd

their strongest expression in   herbivorous Lepidoptera. [I-l-7]
5l3h-is—suggests—t:hat CO2 sensitivity is important throughout that order, but the functional role
has remained unclear. [I- l -8]

A Sensory organs that detect C0; are common in herbivorous moths and butterﬂies, but
their function has been unclear until now. [A-l-l; oec2- 97110539]

3.2.2 VVith a Connective

Leech & Svartvik (l975:l58) listed: coordination, subordination, and adverbial link, as three
ways to aggregate clauses. Depending on whether equal, or unequal weight is to be given to
the units, the appropriate conjunction, or adverbial is then used.

Aggregation by Coordination

Selected clauses from complex sentences (Sc) are commonly aggregated with a coordinate
conjunction, e.g. and, but, or, to form another complex sentence The selected clauses need
not share a common unit.

C2a: [Sﬂsc + [S2]gc A [S1 connective Sgjsc

Ch0y—Kim CH UAH

(5)
éheme colonies without slaves are com on. [I-1-3]
Formica subnuda is a facultative slave-making ant,
[I-2-1]
A Formica subnuda is a facultative slave-making %t,ﬂ colonies without slaves are often
found. [A-1-1; bes2-9638145]
As sentences studied are highly complex with multiple sentences, it is possible that the units
aggregated are from the same sentence.

(6)

. .2

a%%H  asymmetry manipulation:
removed, representing the most extreme level of FA or RA;
, representing a mid-point within the
range of natural FA variation;  [M-6-3]
A Asymmetry treatments represented values within the range of natural FA variation as well
Q more extreme values characteristic of regenerative asymmetry.

[A-1-9;bes1-9945087]
C2b: [NP1VP1]Sc + [NP1VP2]gc A [NP1VP1 connective VP2]gc

If coordinated aggregation involves a shared unit, then the redundant unit has to be
deleted. As in aggregation by conﬂation, to combine, the abstractor must first determine the
units to be equivalent or synonymous: in (7), parasitism by eulophids and eulophid parasitism
are equivalent. Aggregation was followed by a substitution which requires domain
knowledge: generic word taxa substitutes for hybrid and parental plants.

(7)  , parasitism by eulophids,   varied
signiﬁcantly among i=iatui=a-1-l=y-eeeuH=i-rig hybrid and parental plants in 1994. [D-1-2]
Eulophid parasitism,  , appeared to account for the variation in

survival among taxa. [D-1-3]
A Parasitism by eulophid wasps differed signiﬁcantly among taxa in 1994 ad appeared to
account for the variation in their survival. [A-1-3; oec2-97l 103 60]

In (8), aggregation is complicated by anaphor resolution, and knowing when and what
may be deleted. While the fact that the sentences here are consecutive, helps to determine the
entity referred to by the anaphor these, document knowledge is still required to determine
what the noun referred to is. Is it rules, or is it process?

(8) Simple movement rules,  , may be acquired through a

gradual associative learning process,  _

[I-3- 1]

An alternative hypothesis is that these are innate,  processes, m
:= ‘-v.= ‘ ' =“ ~ - -: = ‘ v:. : .;-; ' =‘-“ . [1-3-2]

A These patterns may be innate_,£ they may be learned through the bees’ early foraging
experience. [A-1-2; bes2-9639381]

Aggregation bv Subordination

The patterns of aggregation for subordinated and coordinated aggregation differ in the choice
of conjunction which depends very much on the communicative intent of the author which a
non-author abstractor usually has no direct access.

(9)   Sdumicola has control over its mean sex ratio but

not of its variance. [D-5-4]

Aggregation by Conﬂation of Quasi-Synonymous Units in Author Abstracting

the sex ratio biasing
mechanism in Sdumicola cannot be modiﬁed to control the sex  or

the sex ratio variance  . [D-6-2]
A The sex ratio biasing mechanism in this species, therefore, apparently only allows control
of the mean sex ratio but not of its variance. [A-1-7; besl-9946237]

3. 2.3 VVith (Semi—)c0l0n

In aggregations with a semi-colon or colon, the punctuation substitutes for the implicit
semantic relation which has been expressly omitted. Aggregations with a (semi-)colon as with
other aggregation types, are accompanied by Various condensation sub-processes.

Semi-colon

Ehrlich & Murphy (1974:111) say that “When no close relationship exists between two
independent clauses, a semicolon can be used to join them”.

C3: [X]g + [Y]g A [X (semi-)colon Y]g
While this makes the semicolon a convenient means for combining just about any two
clauses, most of the clauses aggregated in the present study are related.

(10) The most abundant prey organisms brought to the nest were Aphidoidea (48.1%), followed by
Psocoptera (12.5%),  [R-9-4]
Only three spiders (two lycosids and one salticid) were brought to the nests. [R-9-5]
A The majority of prey captured by ants were Aphidoidea (48.1%) and Psocoptera
(12.5%)<semi-colon> spiders represented only 1.4% of the ants’ diet.
[A-1-8; oec2-97109313]
In one of four cases, the (semi-)colon is additionally accompanied by a connective to make
explicit the semantic relation (see (11)).

(11)
male body size or male balloon size were important
criteria for male mating success. [R-4- 1]
The empty balloon produced by some species of empidine ﬂies has been hypothesized to be a
sexually selected trait. [D-4- 1]
A Both male body size and balloon size are important components in determining male
mating success; <semi-colon> however, the empty balloon does not appear to play a
typical role as a sexually selected ornament. [A-1-11; besl-9945161]
Colon

Colons are used “to set off a series of words, phrases, or clauses from the rest of a sentence, to
restate, explain or illustrate a statement immediately before it;  to replace a semicolon for
stylistic purposes [to break between clauses]” (Ehrlich & Murphy, 1974:25-27). In the study
corpus, there were more examples of aggregation with a colon than with a semi-colon.

(12)  a conspicuous male secondary sexual
characteristic i-i=i—t-he-eeui=t-sl=i-i-p of the wolf spider Schizocosa ocreata (-I=Iei=it-z-) (Araneae:

Lycosidae). [I-3-2]
' . , -- - :- '  :- ' -;. --= =- -- - amale secondarysexual
characteristic, a conspicuous tuft of bristles and dark pigmentation on the tibia a1=id—patel-1-a
of the first pair of legs of ma_t_u_r_e male S. ocreata,
[I-5-3]
A Males of the brush-legged wolf spider, Schizocosa ocreata (Araneae: Lycosidae), possess
a conspicuous male secondary sexual character<colon> dark pigmentation and tufts of
bristles on the tibiae of their forelegs. [A-1-1; besl-963 8017]
Ch0y—Kim CH UAH

4 Discussion

4.1 Occurrence of aggregation

Aggregation is an important sub-process in condensation. Two-thirds of ab-sentences are the
result of combining text units from multiple sentences. Of two-sentence aggregations, three
quarters were combined without an explicit sign by conﬂating semantically equivalent units,
while the rest were combined with an explicit sign, a connective or a (semi-)colon (in the
ratio of 4:1). This shows the importance of studying aggregation without an explicit sign.
Most of the sentences aggregated come from Introduction, which is reﬂective of the section
where important sentences might be found.

4.2 Types of Aggregation

4. 2. 1 By conﬂation

While Shaw (l998:l39) in his study on text generation noted “coordinate constructions [to
be] the most popular aggregation operations, followed by PPs [i.e. prepositional phrases], and
then adjectives”, three per four ab-sentences in the present study were aggregated by
conﬂation. This is not surprising since aggregating with an explicit sign (connective/(semi-
)colon), restricts the number of units that may be combined at any one time. If maximum
information is to be condensed into a single sentence, then aggregation by conﬂation is more
effective. To avoid the use of excessive explicit signs to combine sentences, studies in
generation need to look into aggregation by conﬂation.

To conﬂate sentences, a myriad of processes, condensation and non-condensation, are
often implicated. Also, the units to be merged must first be determined to be semantically
equivalent. As the units are often equivalent under the guise of synonyms, hypernyms, partial
repetitions and metonyms, knowledge ranging from linguistic to experimental to
world/domain, is prerequisite. The present research which is preliminary, needs to be
followed by studies into the determination of equivalent units and the type of knowledge
involved.

4.3 With Connective or (Semi-)Colon

To help a reader process a complex sentence on unfamiliar material, aggregations with
connectives which make explicit the semantic relation between units joined, are preferred. In
such aggregations, even if a non-author abstractor can decide on the pattern of aggregation,
the crux of the problem is which conjunction or adverbial to use such that author’s intent is
communicated.

The use of a (semi-)colon to aggregate sentences does not mean that there is no
semantic relation between the sentences, rather, that “the connection is implicit, and has to be
inferred by the reader” (Leech & Svartvik, l975:l62). However, because of the need to be
explicit in scientific and technical texts, an adverbial or conjunction is additionally inserted
25% of the time to help a reader process unfamiliar text. The sign to use is also contingent on
factors such as style and target reader.

Unlike linguistic units combined in made-up sentences, units actually aggregated are
not only different in syntactic class, but are from sentences of differing structure and require
experimental knowledge to know that they co-refer, e.g. tritrophic-level interactions and
herbivore-parasitoid interaction (see (16)).

Aggregation by Conﬂation of Quasi-Synonymous Units in Author Abstracting

(16) Plant hybridization affects tritrophic-level interactions  [D- l - 1]
However, the common garden results strongly suggest that the differences in enemy impact

among plants has a genetic basis. [D-6-3]
—> The common garden results show that genetic differences in plants affect the herbivore-
parasitoid interaction. [A-l-7; oec2-97110360]

4.4 Problems and Prerequisites

Because sentences in scientific and technical documents are not only long but complex, with
an average of about 22 words, a simple aggregation is not possible. To ensure that the output
sentence is readable, aggregation is almost always accompanied by various condensation sub-
processes, e. g. deletion, to prune off marginal texts. Studies into the interplay of these other
processes with aggregation is ultimately necessary. An abstract has also to be formulated in
words appropriate to the intended readership.

Besides these problems, an abstracting system is faced with problems related to the
prerequisites of abstracting, such as anaphor resolution, determination of the entity referred to
in metonymy, and determination of the full form of partial repetitions. Even if the problem of
anaphor resolution is alleviated when the sentences are adjacent, and the full form of
compound nouns can be determined by a simple concordance of relevant nominal forms, the
uncovering of an entity referred to in metonymy which requires experimental or world
knowledge, remains problematic. To go beyond, solutions to these problems have first to be
found.

4.5 Conclusion and Future Work

As just seen, aggregation in real situations is far different from that treated in hypothetical
situations. While one may know how to aggregate, and to detect redundancy, the role of
experimental and domain knowledge in conﬂation is equally urgent. Because conﬂation is an
effective and common means of aggregation, future studies should look into the exploitation
of knowledge to this end. Pending long-term measures to understand this condensation sub-
process, short-term studies can concentrate on condensing single sentences with the ultimate
aim of combining them. We note that the present findings on how an author aggregate
sentences are more pertinent to summarization by extraction than by generation.

A study situation proposed for further research is scientific and technical articles,
which not only have a high turnover and demand, but are a source of examples for ﬁnding
patterns/strategies in aggregation. The sentences are highly complex. As aggregation involves
other condensation sub-process, parallel studies should be conducted to address problems on
the (automatic) deletion, and identification of synonymous units, and the entity referred to in
metonymy.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank all my anonymous reviewers for providing feedback which greatly
improved the article. The research reported here was made possible by support from
Universiti Sains Malaysia.

References

Barzilay, R. & Elhadad, M. (1997) Using Lexical Chains for Text Summarization. Proc. of the
ACL’97/EACL’97 Workshop on Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization, pp. 10-17, Universidad
Nacional de Educacion a Distancia, Madrid, Spain, July 11.

Choy-Kim CH UAH

Chuah, C. (2001) Linguistic Processes for Content Condensation in Abstracting Scientific Texts. PhD
thesis. Universite de Montreal (to appear).

Crystal, D. (1997) A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics, 4th edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dalianis, H. (1999) Aggregation in Natural Language Generation. Computational Intelligence.
15(4):384-415.

Dalianis, H. & Hovy, E. (1993) Aggregation in Natural Language Generation. In Giovanni Adorni and
Michael Zock (eds.) Trends in Natural Language Generation: An Artificial Intelligence Perspective.
Fourth European Workshop, EWNLG ’93, Pisa, Italy, April 1993, pp. 88-105.

Ehrlich, E. & Murphy, D. (1974) Concise Index to English. New York: McGraW-Hill Book Co..

Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J ., & Chen, F. (1995) A Trainable Document Summarizer. Proc. of the 18th
Annual Intl. ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development on Information Retrieval, pp. 68-
73. Seattle, Washington USA. July 1995.

Leech, G. & Svartvik, J . (1975)A Communicative Grammar of English. London: Longman.

Mann, W.C. & Moore, J .A (1980) Computer as Author - Results and Prospects. Research report
ISI/RR-79-82, University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey.

Marcu, D. (1997) From Discourse Structures to Text Summaries. Proc. of the ACL’97/EACL’97
Workshop on Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization, pp. 82-88, Universidad Nacional de Educacion
a Distancia, Madrid, Spain. July 11.

Paice, C.D. (1981) The Automatic Generation of Literature Abstracts: An Approach Based on the
Identification of Self-Indicating Phrases. In R.N. Oddy, Robertson, S.E., van Rijsbergen, C.J. &
Williams, P.W. (eds.) Information Retrieval Research, pp. 172-191.

Paice, C.D. (1990) Constructing Literature Abstracts by Computer: Techniques and Prospects. Info.
Processing & Management 26(1): 171-186.

Reape, M. & Mellish, C. (1999) Just What is Aggregation Anyway? Proc. of the 7th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pp. 20-29, Toulouse, France, 13-14 May, 1999.

Shaw, J. (1998) Clause Aggregation Using Linguistic Knowledge. Proc. of the 9th International
Workshop on Natural Language Processing, pp. 138-147, Niagara-on-Lake, Ontario, Canada, 5-7
Aug.

Appendix
Table A1. Statistics on corpus
Full-text Abstract Reduction factor (RF)
Corpus size 7938 sn+; 175,613 wd 534 sn; 11,975 wd 7938:534 = 15:1;
15:1
Size ofarticle 62-269 sn; 1,552-6,333 5-21 sn; 109-415 wd 7:1-31:1; 7:1-31:1
WCl

Av. size ofarticle 139 sn;3,081wd 9sn;210wd 15:1;15:1

Range of sn 4-129 wd 7-80 wd

length

+ sn = sentences; wd = words; RF = No. ft-sn (or wd): No. ab-sn (or wd). Av. sn length = 22 wds.
