
A System for Extraction of Temporal Expressions from
French Texts
Nikolai Vazov
Groupe sur l’asymétrie des langues naturelles, UQAM
c1144@er.uqam.ca
Résumé
Cet article présente un système pour l’identification automatique des expressions temporelles dans des
textes français. La procédure d’identification repose sur une stratégie d’exploration contextuelle qui met
en oeuvre deux techniques complémentaires: recherche des patrons (expressions régulières) et chart
parsing qui est déclenché en fonction des patrons repérés.
Mots-clés : chart parsing, exploration contextuelle
We present a system for extraction of temporal expressions from French texts. The identification of
the temporal expressions is based on a context-scanning strategy (CSS) which is carried out by two
complementary techniques: search for regular expressios and left-to-right and right-to-left local chart-
parsing. A number of semantic and distant-dependency constraints have been integrated to the chart-
parsing procedure in order to improve the precision of the system.
Keywords : chart parsing, context-scanning
1 Introduction

The identification and the interpretation of temporal and aspectual information plays an im-
portant role in text understanding. This information is encoded in the natural languages by a
wide array of linguistic means ranging from grammatical (morpho-syntactic) to lexical (verbs
and adverbials) or strictly syntactic phenomena (temporal anaphora (Webber1988) or argument
structure of the verb (Verkuyl1993)).
In this paper we present a system for identification of lexical non-verbal means of expressing
temporal information in French texts. Such means are the temporal adverbs (e.g. yesterday)
and adverbials (e.g. three days before the marriage of his youngest son) studied in detail in
(Bras and Molinès1993; Gagnon and Lapalme1996), as well as the temporal subordinate clauses
(e.g. When Peter arrived, ...) . The identification of these temporal expressions is based on a
context-scanning strategy (CSS) (Charolles1997; Desclés1997) which is carried out by two
This research has been supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (grant #
412-97-0016), for the ”Assymmetry and Natural Language Processing Project”, awarded to professor Anne-Marie
Di Sciullo, in the Département de Linguistique at Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM).
Nikolai Vazov
complementary techniques: search for regular expressions and left-to-right and right-to-left
chart-parsing.
The first technique looks for a particular set of markers (regular expressions) encoding temporal
information. These markers can be stand-alone or parsing-triggering. The stand-alone mark-
ers are inactive chart elements (not necessarily a single word) which represent autonomous
temporal expressions. The adverb then in Then, this was the only solution is an example of a
stand-alone marker.
The second technique of the CSS is launched, if the system identifies a parsing-triggering
marker. The parsing-triggering markers are active chart elements which signal the presence
of a larger temporal expression (for example before in three weeks before Christmas) and trig-
ger a chart-parsing procedure for its identification. The chart-parsing scans the left and the right
context of the marker in order to determine which lexical units from this context belong to the
temporal expression. The identified entire temporal expression represents a temporal marker
(inactive chart element) generated incrementally by association of chart elements situated to the
left and to the right of the parsing-triggerring marker (the initial active chart element) (Wonsever
and Minel2001).
The present paper is organised in 4 sections. Section 2 is a short presentation of the CSS as a
method for goal-oriented information extraction. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the central notions
of the system, namely the markers and the chart-parsing rules. The architecture of the system is
shown in section 5.
2 The underlying principles of the context-scanning strategy
The context-scanning strategy (CSS) (Desclés et al.1997; Berri et al.1996; Minel et al.2000;
Minel and Desclés2000) is based on the hypothesis that the semantic representations are not
necessarily determined by world knowledge but can be considered as configurations integrating
elements of local linguistic information. The interaction of these elements is controlled by a
set of mechanisms which build the semantic representation by putting together all the pieces
of local information. The elements of this representation can be derived from grammar or
lexical semantics and from some syntactic phenomena which together account for the non-
atomic (holistic) compositionality of semantic representations (Gosselin1996).
This hypothesis allows to formulate the two distinctive features of the CSS:
The CSS is designed to carry out a very specific task: to identify and interpret all the
surface linguistic elements which account for a particular semantic representation. It
does not claim to provide a complete analysis of texts.
The CSS extracts sets of interactive elements integrated in complex semantic representa-
tions. Unlike the approaches based on world knowledge, it deduces these representations
using exclusively linguistic data found in the text.

The system presented in this paper satisfies both features. The specific task of the system (first
feature) is to identify all non-verbal linguistic units which can convey temporal information and
to group them in sets. These sets are called temporal expressions and may contain one or more
members.
All temporal expressions are considered as semantic functions whose argument is the semantic
value of the grammatical tense in the analysed utterance. The result of the application of this
A System for Extraction of Temporal Expressions from French Texts
function to its argument is the semantic (aspecto-temporal) value of the entire utterance. Thus,
the identification of the temporal expressions is an important step in the deduction of a seman-
tic representation which integrates information from different linguistic units (second feature).
Utterances in 1 and 2 show the role of the temporal expressions in this deduction. Example 1
denotes an event which took place before the utterance time. In turn, the lack of temporal ex-
pression in 2 entails a double interpretation: the utterance can refer either to the fact of Jeanne’s
departure in a past moment, or to the fact that Jeanne is absent at the moment of utterance. This
ambiguity is manifested in the English translation of 2.

(1) Jeanne est partie trois minutes avant Pierre.
Jeanne left three minutes before Pierre.

(2) Jeanne est partie.
Jeanne left/has left.
The discussion in this paper will focus only on the first feature of the implemented CSS, namely,
the identification and regrouping of linguistic units into temporal expressions.
As it was mentioned in the introduction, the identification of the temporal expressions is carried
out at two steps: identification of markers (stand-alone and parsing-triggering) and chart-parsing
applied to the left/right context of the parsing triggering markers. These steps will be discussed
in detail in the following two sections.
3 Selection of the markers (active & inactive chart elements)
( ✁ ✄
✂ ✆
All temporal markers (regular expressions) detected by the system at the first step of the analysis
fall into two sets and            ✁ ☎✞✝).

The set contains the stand-alone markers which represent autonomous temporal expressions.
These expressions can be represented by the following context-scanning rule:
✟✡✠ ☛✌☞✎✍✑✏ ✒✔✓ ✕✗✖✔☞✎✏✑✠ ✘ ✘ ✙ ✍ ✚✜✛✣✢✥✤ ✢✗✦✧                               (1)
The stand-alone markers are grouped in two subsets (
✩★✪✂✫ ✪✬ ☎✭✝ ), defined with regard to the
structure of their elements.
✮ markers (  ★ ) representing constant strings (for example, par la suite ’after that’, le lende-
✮ markers    ✬
main matin ’the next day’s morning’)
( ) specifying the initial element of a string, considered as a temporal expres-
✚✜✯✞✰ number of characters (including spaces, diacritics and special symbols
sion, and the set of all subsequent authorised characters (for example, quand ’when’
followed by
as &, %, etc.).
The markers included in the set          ✁
are both indicators and constituent elements of a larger
temporal expression. They are the active elements of a chart-parsing procedure which they
launch in order to determine the boundaries of this expression in the analysed sentence.
The temporal expressions signaled by the markers from this set can be represented by the fol-

✟✩✠ ☛✱☞✲✍ ✏✑✒✳✓ ✕✗✖✳☞✲✏ ✠✑✘ ✘ ✙ ✍✑✚✴✛✶✵✸✷✗✹ ☛✜✹ ✺✗✷✻✤✼☛✞✦ ✁
lowing contextual rule:
(2)
where
Nikolai Vazov
- LC is the left context of the marker m. It contains an array of strings (lexical units) whose
syntactic categories have been authorised by the right-to-left chart-parser (see section 4)
- LC can be empty
- “.” is the operator of concatenation
- RC is the right context of the marker m. It contains an array of strings (lexical units) whose
syntactic categories have been authorised by the left-to-right chart-parser (see section 4)
- RC can be empty

All the markers in have been organised in three subsets         ,
✂✁  ☎✄   and
☎✆ ( ✝✁ ✞✟ ☎✄ ✞✟ ☎✆✡✠☞☛ ),
according to the particularities of the chart-parsers they trigger:
✌                                                              ✁
Markers triggering a left-to-right chart parser ( ). These markers represent the leftmost
lexical unit of the larger temporal expression and launch parsing rules applying exclu-
sively to the right context of the marker. This set contains markers like il y a ’ago’, au

cours ’during’, etc.
✌     Markers triggering a left-to-right and a right-to-left parser ( ). The markers included
in this set never occur at the leftmost or at the rightmost position in the larger temporal
expression. Hence, the need to analyse both their left and right context in order to iden-
tify the boundaries of the temporal expression they belong to. This is the largest of the
three sets and contains elements like the names of the months, temporal units (minute,

✝✆
seconde,..), names of the 4 seasons, etc.
✌     Markers requiring a left-to-right and a right-to-left parser ( ). These are the markers
which can occur at any position in the larger temporal expression. However, the left and
right parsing rules may eventually rule out the left and/or the right context as not belong-
ing to the temporal expression and return the detected marker as the only constructive
element of the temporal expression. An example of such a marker is après ’after’ in the
following sentences:
(3) Jeanne est arrivée trois minutes après Pierre.
Jeanne came three minutes after Pierre.
(4) Jeanne est arrivée trois minutes après.
Jeanne came three minutes later.
(5) Jeanne est arrivée après Pierre.
Jeanne came after Pierre.
(6) Jeanne est arrivée après.
Jeanne came later.

Example 3 shows a larger temporal expression (trois minutes après Pierre) which extends to
the left and to the right of the detected marker après. In example 4, the same triggering marker
has only a left context (trois minutes), the right one being interpreted by the parser as empty
(punctuation mark stands for the end of a temporal expression). Conversely, in example 5, the
parsing rules will authorise the association of elements (Pierre) from the right context of the
marker but will block the association of such elements (arrivée) from its left context. Finally,
following the same line of reasoning as in examples 4 and 5, the parsing of example 6 will
return the marker itself.

✝✁
The above examples explain why it is important to distinguish between the three sets of trigger-
ing markers. The    markers signal temporal expressions which only extend to the right of the
A System for Extraction of Temporal Expressions from French Texts
✂✁
marker’s position. The
markers signal temporal expressions which extend to the right and
☎✄
to the left of the marker’s position. Alone,
The markers of
markers do not constitute a temporal expression.
can be used alone as temporal expressions or constitute such an expression
together with other elements from their left and/or right context.

✄                                                                ✆✞✝
✆✁             ✝                 ☎✁
The total number of markers detected by the system is 121. They are subdivided as follows:
(7),   (36),    (13),    (51),     (14).
4 Left and right chart-parser rules
4.1 General principles

The left and right chart-parser rules triggered by the
✝✟  ✁
and
☎✄
markers are recursion-
based algorithms. These rules scan the tagged1 right and left context of the marker and control
the association of the adjacent lexical units to the body of the temporal expression signaled by
this marker. The control is carried out by the following context-scanning parsing rules:

Rule for the left context:

while cat            ☛✠ ✡ ☞ C✌ ✍ ✎ ✏
m =    ✑✓✒ .m
n = n - 1

where
- w is a lexical unit from the LC
- n is the position of w in LC
- cat is the syntactic category of w
- m is temporal expression containing only the parsing-triggering marker before the application of
the rule and completed at each loop by a new element from the LC
- “.” is the operator of concatenation
- C   ✌✍ ✎ ✏ ✔                                      ✕
= DET, PRE, ADJ, PRO, NUM, NOC - the set of categories authorised in the positions
preceding the marker m
Rule for the right context:

while cat           ✠ ✡ ☞ C✖ ✗ ✘ ✙ ✏
m =    m.✑ ✒
n = n + 1

where
- w is a lexical unit from the RC
1
The system uses the shareware on-line tagger of LATL.ch S.A.(Société Anonyme) (www.latl.ch). The notation
for the syntactic categories in this discussion follows the notation provided by the tagger: DET (determiner),
PRE (preposition), ADJ (adjective), PRO (pronoun), NUM (numeral), NOC (common noun), ADV (adverb), INF
(infinitive), PPA (past participle), PPR (present participle), CLI (clitic), COJ (conjunction) and NOP (proper noun).
Nikolai Vazov
- n is the position of w in RC
- cat is the syntactic category of w
- m is the temporal expression containing only the parsing-triggering marker before the application
of the rule and completed at each loop by a new element from the RC
- “.” is the operator of concatenation
- C   ✁✂ ✄ ☎ ✆                                                                 ✝
= DET, ADJ, NUM, NOC, ADV, INF, PPA, PPR, CLI, COJ, NOP - the set of categories
authorised in the positions following the marker m

Each rule tries to recursively match a category from a built-in set (C ✞ ✟ ✠ ☎ and C  ✁ ✂ ✄ ☎ ) to the
category of the next lexical unit in the context. If the two categories match, the lexical unit is
associated to the temporal expression and the rule moves on to check the category of the next
lexical unit. In turn, if the two categories do not match, the rule blocks the association of the unit
to the temporal expression and signals the left, respectively, the right boundary of the temporal
expression. The analysis of example 7 below shows the scanning procedure step by step (the
marker heures has been detected at a previous stage):

(7) Ils ont quitté Air France vers 10 heures pour une courte promenade sur les Champs-Elysées.
They left Air France about 10 o’clock for a short walk on Champs-Elysées.

1. left pass: the NUM category of the lexical unit ’10’ matches the built-in category NUM in the
scanning rule
2. left pass: the PRE category of the lexical unit ’vers’ matches the built-in category PRE in the
scanning rule and associates it to the already processed left context: vers 10
3. left pass: the NOP category of the lexical unit ’France’ is not in the rule’s list of categories - the
rule cannot move further left and the system returns: vers 10

1. right pass: the PRE category of the lexical unit ’pour’ is not in the category list of the rule - the
rule cannot move furhter right and the system returns an empty string

The string vers 10 heures constitutes the larger temporal expression signaled initially by the trig-
gering marker heures. Formulated in terms of the rules above it will have the form: ✡☞☛ ✌ ✡✎✍ .m.✏
(7 & 6 are the positions of the lexical units in the LC).
4.2 Constraints in the chart-parsing rules
4.2.1 Constraints on the relative positions of syntactic categories

The matching of categories discussed in the previous section is achieved by context-free rules -
one for the left and one for the right context of the parsing-triggering marker, respectively.
However, this context-free algorithm will fail to detect the boundaries of the temporal expres-
sion in a number of cases where, following a successful category matching, it will associate to
this expression some elements which do not belong to its body. Without additional restrictions
to the rules, the system will provide the following wrong right-context analysis for example 8
(the marker année was detected at a previous stage):

(8) L’année dernière les actions de cette entreprise ont augmenté de 30%.
Last year the shares of this company rose by 30%.
A System for Extraction of Temporal Expressions from French Texts
1.   right pass:   category of dernière is ADJ : authorised
2.   right pass:   category of les is DET (determiner) : authorised
3.   right pass:   category of actions is NOC : authorised
4.   right pass:   category of cette is DET : authorised
5.   right pass:   category of entreprise is NOC : authorised
6.   right pass:   category of ont is VAU (auxiliary): blocked

Since the syntactic categories DET and NOC are in the list of the authorised categories, they
become accepted by the system regardless of their position. The result of this overgeneration
will be the segment l’année dernière les actions de cette entreprise ’last year the shares of this
company’.
To avoid this problem, the above context-free rules have been modified to check the syntactic
categories which are adjacent to the syntactic category under analysis and to verify, if a number
of adjacency constraints have been respected. An example of such a constraint is the following
rule:
If ADJ is immediately preceded by a NOC or by an empty context,
and if it is immediately followed by DET, the DET is not an element of the temporal expression.

In example 8 this constraint will block the association of new elements to the right of the ADJ
dernière due to the empty context preceding the ADJ2 and to the DET category (les) following
the adjective. Similar, yet a more complex constraint on the number and the position of verbs in
the relative clasuses enables the system to extract correctly the temporal expressions (in curly
braces) in examples 9 and 103 :
(9) Le ministre est venu 3 minutes après son porte-parole qui avait déjà annoncé la bonne nouvelle.
The minister came 3 minutes after his spokesman who had already announced the good news.
(10) La réunion a commencé et 3 minutes après son porte-parole qui avait déjà annoncé la bonne
nouvelle est parti pour la capitale.
The meeting began, and 3 minutes later his spokesman who had already announced the good news
left for the capital.

4.2.2 Constraints on the semantics of the lexical units
Another constraint in the chart-parsing rules is the condition on the semantics of the lexical
units in the context of the marker. This constraint affects exclusively the nouns in the left
context of the markers from the set                ✂☎✄
(see section 3). Actually, the left context of these
markers is a modifier of the expression constitued by the marker and its right context. Thus,
three minutes before his departure can be represented as (three minutes(before his
departure)). The internal organisation of these configurations determines the semantics of
the nouns occurring in the left context of the marker: they have to denote a time period, like
minutes, seconds, seasons, etc. The set of these nouns is actually a subset of         - the set of                 ✂☎✆
markers containing the names of months, temporal intervals, etc...(see section 3). In order to
authorise the association of the noun to the temporal expression, the scanning rule checks if this
noun is a member of this subset. If this is the case, the rule moves left to the next lexical unit.
And conversely, if the noun is not a member of this set, the association is blocked and the rule
signals the boundary of the temporal expression.
2
The adjective is the leftmost element of the right context of the marker année.
3
The punctuation marks, like commas, are an important source of information about the temporal expressions’
boundaries. Naturally, the system’s scanning rules take into account their position. The constraints discussed in
section 4.2.1 are needed to process constructions which do not contain punctuation marks.
Nikolai Vazov
5 Architecture of the system and a real example
The overall architecture of the system is shown in Figure 1. The input text is tokenized into
sentences and a search for stand-alone markers is launched.
tokenize text
✝     search for stand-alone markers in sentence N                    ✞
or in left / right context
✆                                                                                         ✆
FOUND                                                                             NOT-FOUND

✆                                                                                     ✂ -triggering markers
search for parsing
✂ context
get left/right                                                                            ✁             ✂ ✂☎✄
✁          ✂ ✂☎✄
FOUND            NOT-FOUND

YES              NO                                            ✁
launch parsing rules                                     ✆
✆                                                                                    N+1
N+1                                            ✆
✂ context
get left/right
✁                ✂ ✂☎✄
YES                        NO

N+1
Figure 1: The flowchart of the system
If the system detects such a marker, it extracts it from the sentence and resumes the search within
its left and right context. If both contexts are empty, the index of sentences is incremented and
the same procedure repeats for sentence ✟ ✠☛✡ . In turn, if the system fails to detect a stand-
alone marker (during the first or any of the following loops), it scans the sentence for parsing-
triggering markers.
If such a marker has been identified, the system launches the chart-parsing rules in order to
identifiy the larger temporal expression signaled by the parsing-triggering marker. Once identi-
fied, the larger temporal expression is extracted from the sentence and its left and right contexts
are scanned again for other markers of the same type. This loop will repeat until there is no
remaining left and right context. Then the system increments the index of the sentences and
resumes the search for stand-alone markers in the next sentence.
The application of the algorithm can be manifested on the following real example (the com-
ments will follow the output of the system):
Trois mille ś
eminaristes, jeunes prˆ
etres et e
́tudiants ont souhait́
e vendredi un bon anniver-
saire au pape qui fˆ
etera samedi ses 21 ans de pontificat, en lui chantant en polonais "
stolat " ( " cent ans " ) , lors d’une messe dans la basilique Saint-Pierre
The first marker detected by the system is ’samedi’. The chart parser launched by this marker
finds no other elements which belong to the temporal expression containing ’samedi’. Hence,
A System for Extraction of Temporal Expressions from French Texts
the system returns the string to the left and to the right of ’samedi’, as the new left and right
context, respectively:
WANTED is:       samedi
NEW LEFT CONTEXT: Trois mille ś
eminaristes , jeunes prˆ
etres et e
́tudiants ont souhait́
e ven-
dredi un bon anniversaire au pape qui fˆ
etera
NEW RIGHT CONTEXT: ses 21 ans de pontificat, en lui chantant en polonais stolat ( cent ans
) , lors d’ une messe dans la basilique Saint-Pierre

The same procedure repeats for the marker ’vendredi’:
WANTED is:       vendredi
NEW LEFT CONTEXT: Trois mille ś
eminaristes , jeunes prˆ
etres et e
́tudiants ont souhait́
e
NEW RIGHT CONTEXT: un bon anniversaire au pape qui fˆ
etera

Since neither of the new contexts contains temporal expressions, the system will resume the
scanning from the right context of the first detected marker - ’samedi’:
ses 21 ans de pontificat, en lui chantant en polonais stolat ( cent ans ) , lors d’ une
messe dans la basilique Saint-Pierre

The system detects the next keyword ’lors d” and the chart parser completes the temporal ex-
pression by adding the right context of the marker. The new left and right contexts of the
expression are returned to the system:
WANTED is:       lors d’
RIGHT CONTEXT: une messe
NEW LEFT CONTEXT: ses 21 ans de pontificat, en lui chantant en polonais stolat (cent ans),
NEW RIGHT CONTEXT: dans la basilique Saint-Pierre

The analysis of the remaining context of ’lors d’une messe’ does not detect new markers and
the system halts returning the identified temporal expressions4
samedi / vendredi / lors d’une messe
PHRASE 1 ANALYSEE ** NOMBRE D’EXPRESSIONS REPEREES: 3
6 Conclusion
The approach presented in this paper extracts non-verbal temporal expressions from French
texts using exclusively linguistic markers and local chart-parsing techniques. The system has
been tested over 98 texts containing temporal expressions of different complexity. At present,
it is being tested over a number of texts from the corpus Hansard (50 million words of debates
in Canadian parliament) in order to evaluate its real precision and recall. The results obtained
by the system can be further used in three different fields:
Information extraction: the temporal expressions retrieved by the system provide substan-
tial information about the temporal localisation of events described in the analysed texts
(Ben Hazez and Minel2000).
Computational semantics: the semantics of the temporal expressions (for example, the set
of expressions referring to past events) along with the semantics of grammatical tenses
4
The goal of the presented system is to detect only the expressions which modify the temporal parameters of the
sentence. Hence, unlike some other studies on temporal tagging or annotaiton (Mani et al.2001), we deliberately
ruled out expressions which do not answer to the question when.
Nikolai Vazov
is a constituent element of the aspecto-temporal value of the sentence (Battistelli2000;
Vazov1999).
Parsing: the temporal expressions are syntactic constituents whose identification by pars-
ing techniques is a difficult task. The identification of this constituent will fix its bound-
aries and hence simplify the task of the parser.

References
D. Battistelli. 2000. Passer du texte à une séquence d’images, analyse spatio-temporelle de textes,
modelisation et réalisation informatique (système SPAT). Ph.D. thesis, Université Paris - Sorbonne.
S. Ben Hazez and J.-L. Minel. 2000. Designing tasks of identification of complex patterns used for
text-filtering. In RIAO, pages 1558–1567.
J. Berri, E. Cartier, J.-P. Desclés, A. Jackiewicz, and J.-L. Minel. 1996. Filtrage automatique des textes.
In Natural Language Processing and Industrial Applications, pages 22–35, Moncton, N.B., Canada.
M. Bras and F. Molinès. 1993. Adverbials of temporal location: Linguisitic description and automatic
processing. In J. Darski and Z. Vetulani, editors, Sprache-Kommunikation-Informatik, Akten des 26
Linguistischen Kolloquium, pages 137–146. Max Niemeyer Verlag.
M. Charolles. 1997. Reconnaissance et délimitation des univers d’énonciation introduits par une expre-
sion selon x et contraction automatique de textes. In Journee d’etude, Filtrage des informations dans
les textes, Paris. Association pour le Traitement Automatique des Langues (ATALA).
J.-P Desclés, E. Cartier, A. Jackiewicz, and J.-L. Minel. 1997. Textual processing and contextual
exploration method. In CONTEXT’97, pages 189–197, Brasil. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
J.-P. Desclés, 1997. Systèmes d’exploration contextuelle. Co-texte et calcul du sens, pages 215–232.
Presses Universitaires de Caen.
M. Gagnon and G. Lapalme. 1996. From conceptual time to linguistic time. Computational Linguistics,
22(1):91–127.
L. Gosselin. 1996. Sémantique de la temporalité en français, Un modèle calculatoire et cognitif du
temps et de l’aspect. Champs linguistiques. Duculot.
I. Mani, L. Ferro, B. Sundheim, and G. Wilson. 2001. Guidelines for annotating temporal informa-
tion. In Notebook Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference 2001, pages 299–302, San
Diego, California, March 18-21.
J-L. Minel and J-P. Desclés. 2000. Résumé Automatique et Filtrage des textes. Ingénierie des langues.
Editions Hermès, Paris.
J.-L. Minel, J.-P. Desclés, E. Cartier, G. Crispino, S. Ben Hazez, and A. Jackiewicz. 2000. Résumé
automatique par filtrage sémantique d’informaitons dans des textes. TSI, X(X):1–23.
N. Vazov. 1999. Context-scanning strategy in temporal reasoning. In Modeling and Using Context (Sec-
ond International and Interdisciplinary Conference, CONTEXT’99), pages 389–402. Springer-Verlag.
H. Verkuyl. 1993. A theory of aspectuality. The interaction between temporal and atemporal structure.
Cambridge Studies in Lingustics. Cambridge University Press.
B. Webber. 1988. Tense as discourse anaphor. Computational Linguistics, 14(2):61–73.
D. Wonsever and J.-L. Minel. 2001. Contextual rules for text analysis. In 2nd International conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics CICLing-2001, Mexico City.
