Conférence TALN 2000, Lausanne, 16-18 octobre 2000
Phonological feature based multilingual lexical description

Carole Tiberius and Roger Evans
Information Technology Research Institute
University of Brighton
Brighton, UK
{Carole.Tiberius,Roger.Evans}@itri.brighton.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a framework for compactly describing word forms in terms of phono-
logical features. Using a highly modular default-inheritance based approach, the framework
supports the description of lexical generalisations traditionally modelled as morphology and
phonology in a single phonology-based representation. This representation is more uniform
and more detailed than previous approaches of this kind, allowing us to capture generalisa-
tions within a language and between related language elegantly and flexibly. The framework is
illustrated with examples taken from English, German, Dutch and Danish.
1. Introduction
This paper presents a framework for compactly describing word forms in terms of phono-
logical features. The principal components of a lexicon in this framework are definitions which
correspond to lexemes – families of words related by inflectional or derivational processes.
Given such a lexeme definition, it is possible to read off the phonological structures associated
with the word forms.
We restrict ourselves to a segmental representation of the phonology, describing each seg-
ment using a set of features, such as phonation, manner, roundness, and length. Internally,
generalisations over words are captured using default inheritance. Our description framework
applies to words within one language, but also across different languages, allowing high level
cross-linguistic generalisations to be captured.
The framework covers aspects of word formation that traditionally encompass both mor-
phology and phonology. However, there is no overt representation of morphology here: all the
generalisations made are generalisations over phonological structure. In this sense the approach
is data-driven, where the ‘data’ consists of the phonological structure of words and all general-
isations are ultimately about some aspect of that structure. The only hint of morphology is in
the operators associating word forms to lexemes, which have morphosyntactic names such as
plural and definite, but even these relate structure which is in fact phonological.
The framework is implemented in the lexical description language DATR (Evans & Gazdar,

1996). This provides both a formally rigorous foundation for the lexicon and a computational
implementation with which to test the definitions, and from which to compile runtime lexicons
in appropriate formats for different NL applications. The intention is that a framework like
this provides a high level, highly structured, easily maintained and extended lexical resource.
Although it can be utilised directly as a computational lexicon (using a DATR query engine),
high performance NL applications will typically use representations automatically derived from
the DATR code, and possibly highly optimised for the particular application in hand.
This work is perhaps most straightforwardly viewed as a development of the PolyLex lexical
description framework (Cahill & Gazdar, 1997; Cahill & Gazdar, 1999a; Cahill & Gazdar,
1999b). PolyLex adopts a similar formal and theoretical approach to lexical description, but
only describes words to the level of phonological segments. In addition it does include some
explicit morphological machinery. Our proposal extends the PolyLex word model down to
the level of phonological features, and adopts a more uniform phonologically-based approach
to lexical generalisation. This allows us to capture more generalisations more precisely, and
to organise our lexicon into distinct self-contained modules corresponding to levels of lexical
description (lexeme, syllable, segment etc.)
This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses the theoretical background and re-
lated work in this area. Section 3 and 4 present the framework itself: the way word forms
are represented, and how hierarchical descriptions of word forms are organised. In section 5,
we illustrate the framework with examples using Dutch, English, German and Danish nouns.
Section 6 outlines current areas of development.
2. Theoretical background
The traditional view of word formation treats morphology and phonology as distinct aspects
of a word’s internal structure. However there is strong evidence that these two aspects interact
in the word formation process. For example allomorphic variation of affixes is frequently deter-
mined by phonological context and affixation itself often imposes phonological requirements.
There are also nonaffixational morphological relations, such as umlaut, whose origins are purely
phonological. Such phenomena make a clean definition of a morphology/phonology interface
problematic. In broad terms, two main positions on this issue can be distinguished in the liter-
ature: noninteractionism in which morphology strictly precedes phonology, providing abstract
structures on which phonological rules operate (e.g. SPE model (Chomsky & Halle, 1968)),
and interactionism which allows some phonological operations to precede morphological ones
(e.g. Lexical Phonology (Mohanan, 1986)).
In the last decade, theories have been developed which take an intermediate position, notably
Cahill (1990; 1993) and Gibbon (1992). The idea behind Cahill’s syllable-based morphology is
that since many morphological alternations are phonologically based, they can be best described
as mappings between sequences of tree-structured syllables. Effectively, morphological opera-
tions are defined in terms of changes to the phonology. For example, German umlaut (Apfel —
Äpfel) will be represented as a change of the vowel (peak) of the first syllable. Our approach
draws heavily on the theoretical work from Cahill (1990) which has been further developed
in Cahill (1993) and Cahill and Gazdar (1997; 1999a). Gibbon (1992) adopts a very similar
position, although his work is more tuned towards lexicons for speech applications integrating
phonological information above the level of the syllable, such as metrical structure, whereas the
focus here is the structure within syllables.

Both these approaches still make a distinction between morphology and phonology. For
example, Cahill and Gazdar (1997; 1999a) define the morphological form of a word in terms
of the phonological form of its root and the morphological form of a suffix. However, they
do not adopt the traditional notion of level of description, or of rules mapping from one level
to the other. The linguistic description is just a set of simultaneously applicable constraints.
These constraints may, for example, directly connect morphosyntactic attributes to individual
phonological components of word forms.
Our work pushes this view further making no sharp distinction between morphology and
phonology at all. We start with the actual structures that we are aiming to describe, and gener-
alise over them motivated purely by structural considerations, without any preconceptions about
whether the generalisations are phonological or morphological. Our initial structures are phono-
logical, and so our generalisations are phonological. There are echos of traditional morphology,
for example generalisations which correspond to some extent to traditional ‘morphemes’, but
no explicit separation or reference to morphology is required. To put it another way, we view
morphology as ‘just’ abstractions over phonology, and by utilising a sufficiently powerful ab-
straction language to describe the phonology, we obviate the need for a separate morphological
language.
Nevertheless, our approach does reveal structural distinctions which induce a high degree of
modularity in our representations. Like Zwicky (1990), the framework explored here opts for
something like the subcomponent divisions of traditional grammar, rather than the level or strata
of “lexical morphology/phonology”. Thus we distinguish lexemes, syllable sequences, syllables
and phonemes, so that even a word consisting of just one phoneme requires corresponding
syllable, syllable sequence and lexeme structures to be defined.
Following Cahill and Gazdar (1997; 1999a), we adopt a segmental model of phonology in
which phonological units are discrete and in simple temporal sequence. However, rather than
using phonemic transcriptions, where the primitives are vowels and consonants, we go down to
the level of phonological features. This permits a more accurate and a more elegant treatment
of phenomena such as elision, final consonant devoicing, vowel lengthening, and assimilation
(e.g. Cahill (1993), Coleman (1992), Bird and Klein (1990)). For example, vowel lengthening
involves just a change in the length feature of the vowel, regardless of the particular vowel
involved, whilst final consonant devoicing just changes the voice feature of final consonants1.
We concentrate on the treatment of inflection and in particular the syllable structure of in-
flected forms. We do not currently address higher level issues such as metrical structure or
lexical stress. Our general approach is of the inferential-realisational type (e.g. Zwicky (1985;
1990), Anderson (1988), Stump (1993a; 1993b)). In theories of this type, paradigms (inflec-
tional classes, declensions, conjugations, etc.) are treated as analytically central, rather than
epiphenomenal or of secondary status. The central notion in these theories is the lexeme, not
the word or the morpheme. Words exist as realisations of morphosyntactic specifications of
lexemes: an inflected word’s association with a particular set of morphosyntactic properties
licenses the application of rules determining the word’s inflectional form. For example, the
English word likes arises by means of a rule appending -s to any verb stem associated with the
properties “third-person singular subject agreement”, “present tense”, and “indicative mood”.
In our framework lexemes, represented as DATR nodes, are the primary content of a lexicon
and word forms are accessed by applying lexical operations (implemented using the lexical rule
1
Of course, a segmental description is still an idealisation of reality – see Cahill, Carson-Berndsen, and Gaz-
dar (2000) for a discussion of how a segmental description can be extended to deal with nonsegmental issues.

techniques described in Evans, Gazdar and Weir (1995; 2000) and Smets and Evans (1998))
such as singular, definite or third-person to lexemes.
Our framework makes extensive use of default inheritance to capture linguistic generalisa-
tions. In this sense it is closely related to Corbett and Fraser’s Network Morphology (Corbett
& Fraser, 1993), which treats language as a network of interacting parallel hierarchies of lin-
guistic knowledge. However, in Network Morphology the hierarchical structure is motivated by
theoretical and typological principles, in contrast to our more data-driven view. For example,
we might introduce the notion of a suffix, not because we are following a linguistic theory that
presupposes a suffixation operation, but because a suffix captures a generalisation about final
components of many word forms.
3. The structure of word forms
The primary objects our lexicon aims to describe are word forms, or more precis ely phono-
logical analyses of word forms. We view such word forms as labelled tree structures with a
root representing the whole word form and successive decomposition into syllable sequences
and then syllables. An example of the tree structure associated with the singular of the lexeme
Hand, is given in figure 1.

syllable sequence

1

syllable
onset                 rhyme

1
peak              coda
voiceless
1          1          2
fricative
glottal        voiced       voiced voiced
vowellike       nasal plosive
front       apical apical
low
unrounded
short
Figure 1: Wordform structure for hand
Following (Cahill, 1990), we assume that each syllable consists of an onset (the initial
consonant cluster) and a rhyme, and the rhyme consists of a peak (the vowel(s)) and a coda (the
final consonant cluster). Each vowel or consonant phoneme is represented by a full feature set:
for example, the first phoneme of the onset of hand is a voiceless fricative glottal consonant.
Where sequences of components (syllables, phonemes etc.) occur, they are numbered from left
to right. In the case of hand, the syllable sequence contains a single syllable, labelled ‘1’, and the
onset and peak of that syllable contain single phonemes, but in the coda we have two phonemes

labelled ‘1’ and ‘2’. In our model, multiple peaks are only used to describe diphthongs. Long
vowels are considered as single peaks.
In figure 1, the analysis consisted of a single root represented as a (1 element) syllable se-
quence. More complex word forms are described using a binary concatenation node ‘concat’.
We view such concatenations as themselves syllable sequences (but not flat ones), so that we
have a cyclic representation space: concat can dominate flat syllable sequences (primitive units
of word formation) or other concat nodes, allowing more complex word forms to be represented.
Note however that we do not distinguish prefixation from suffixation, or roots from affixes:
concat is simple left-right concatenation. Figure 2 shows the syllable sequence structure for the
English plural form fingers, consisting of the concatenation of a two element sequence finger
and the single element sequence s2 . Notice that this last element would not conventionally be
considered a complete phonological syllable, but at this level of the analysis it is useful to treat
it in the same way as other ‘real’ syllables. We return to this point in section 6 below.

concat
1                   2

syllable sequence syllable sequence

1        2               1

fIN       r               s
Figure 2: Word form structure for fingers
4. The organisation of lexemes
The previous section discussed the structure of the word forms the lexicon aims to represent.
In this section we outline the way default inheritance and rule application are used to represent
such word forms compactly.
The framework defines word form trees equationally, that is the trees do not exist as data
structures (attribute-value matrices, for example), but are described by sets of equations each of
which associates a path from root to leaf in a tree with one of the phonological feature values
specified at that leaf. For example, the ‘onset’ subtree in figure 1 can be described by the
following three equations:

<phon 1 syll onset 1 phonation> == voiceless
<phon 1 syll onset 1 manner> == fricative
<phon 1 syll onset 1 place> == glottal

These equations are not simply listed for each word form, however, but are organised into an
inheritance hierarchy. There are three main components to the organisational structure of the
lexicon.
2
Here and sometimes below we use SAMPA CELEX transcriptions (Baayen et al. 1995, Wells 1987,1989) to
abbreviate actual phonological feature bundles where the feature details are not important.

First, the framework is lexeme-based: the ‘objects’ in the lexicon correspond to families of
words, and individual word forms are obtained by applying ‘morphosyntactic’ functions such
as singular, plural, present, past, nominal, gerund. Such functions can
be combined to produce further word forms: for example, applying nominal+plural to the
lexeme for Love gives the structure for the word form lovers. The ‘base’ form (with no functions
applied) does not correspond to any word form (although we could choose to make it do so).
Second, the lexeme definitions are represented using default inheritance: lexemes are de-
fined in terms of more abstract classes (such as Noun, Verb, Modal_verb etc.), inheriting infor-
mation from them, but also overriding inherited information when required. A typical lexeme
needs to specify explicitly its basic own phonological structure, but can inherit all the infor-
mation that specifies how it forms a plural, or nominal, or genitive etc.. If it happens to have,
say, an irregular plural, it can specify this itself too, overriding just that part of the inherited
information.
Third, the internal components of a phonological form are organised into their own inde-
pendent inheritance hierarchies: the lexeme hierarchy inherits actual word forms from a sylla-
ble sequence hierarchy, which inherits individual syllable structures from a syllable hierarchy,
which inherits individual phonemes from the phoneme hierarchy. Figure 3 illustrates these
relationships for the Dutch lexeme Gebed (prayer). As a lexeme, Gebed is primarily linked
into the lexeme hierarchy, inheriting from Noun_EN, a subclass of Noun. But it inherits part
of its content, namely its phonological form, from GEBED in the syllable sequence hierarchy.
GEBED is primarily a Disyllable, but it inherits part of its content, namely the two syllables it
contains, from GE and BED in the syllable hierarchy. Finally the syllable BED inherits part of
its structure, from the consonants b and d and the vowel E in the phoneme hierarchy.

Phonemes
Syllables
Phoneme
Syllable sequences
Syllable
Lexemes
Syll_seq
Noun                                                               Vowel Cons
GE     BED
Disyllable
Noun_EN                                                                E   b       d
GEBED
Gebed

Figure 3: Module and node structure for lexeme Gebed
The lexeme access functions are implemented using the lexical rule techniques described
in Evans, Gazdar and Weir (1995; 2000), Smets and Evans (1998). Each rule maps an ‘input’
phonological tree onto an ‘output’ phonological tree. Each lexeme defines a base tree (which
does not correspond to any actual word form – see above), and the first rule applies to that, the
second to the output of the first and so on – the final word form is the output of the last rule in

the chain.
Rule definitions are specified in the same inheritance structures as the phonological tree
equations. This means that the inheritance hierarchy can be used to control the scope of ap-
plicability of a rule: a universal rule can be defined at the top-most node of the hierarchy, one
which only applies to nouns at the Noun node, one that applies to verbs at the Verb node etc. In-
dividual words can even have their own rules if required. In addition, rule definitions can inherit
and override from ancestor nodes just as lexeme definitions can: the Noun_EN node inherits the
plural rule from Noun, retaining the fact that pluralisation is achieved by concatenating some-
thing to the root, but overriding what is concatenated - -en instead of -s.
Rules may include conditional constructs, testing properties of their input word form struc-
tures to decide whether or how to apply. This can be used to control the scope of rule application,
for example blocking superlative on adjectives that are already in the comparative form, or to
control the effect of rule application, for example choosing between /s/ and /z/ as a plural suffix
in English. More fundamentally, it is also often used to control where in a word form the rule
applies. Because word forms are defined equationally, each rule operates on every equation of
the word form definition. For most of these it will do nothing, being activated only, for example,
in equations relating to the last syllable, or the first peak vowel.
Finally, note that rules can be defined in each of the submodule hierarchies (as shown in
figure 3) independently. Rules in the lexeme hierarchy are invoked directly on lexical access,
but other rules can be invoked from the hierarchy above them, as we shall see in the examples
below.
5. Illustration of the framework
In this section we illustrate these aspects of our framework with some examples from Dutch,
English, German, and Danish.
First, we consider an example of multilingual rule definition – the rule for nouns with a plural
ending in -s in English, Dutch, and German. In our framework, this fact will be captured by
a lexical rule which adds an -s suffix to the root of the noun. This s suffix is realised as an /s/
in Dutch and German, and as an /s/ or /z/ in English due to voicing alternation. In all three
languages a vowel is inserted before the -s, if the root ends in a sibilant. This vowel is realised
as a / / in Dutch and German, and as an /I/ in English. The definition of the plural_s rule in
our framework is illustrated schematically below.
Dutch and German inherit the plural_s rule as it is defined in the common part. The English
plural_s rule inherits from the common part, but overrides the value of the suffix peak, using / /
instead of /I/. It also adjust the voicing of the final /s/ depending on the voicing of the preceding
phoneme.
A second example considers final devoicing in Dutch. Final consonant devoicing applies to
root final obstruents (plosives and fricatives) when the root is not inflected or when an inflec-
tional suffix is added which does not begin with a vowel. This is achieved by means of a lexical
rule which ultimately just sets the phonation feature of the last coda to voiceless.
The devoicing rule in the lexeme module invokes devoicelastsyll in the syllable sequence
module. This does nothing except in the last syllable of the word form, in which it invokes
devoicelastcoda in the syllable module. This also does nothing except in the last coda of the

Common
rule plural_s
* IF root ends in sibilant
THEN insert /@/
* add /s/
English                 Dutch             German
rule plural_s
* IF root ends in sibilant
THEN insert /I/
* IF penultimate phoneme voiced
THEN change /s/ into /z/
Figure 4: Definition of plural_s rule
syllable, in which it invokes devoice in the phoneme module. Here it changes the value for
phonation from voiced to voiceless. This process is schematically represented below.

Phonemes
Syllables

Syllable sequences                                                   rule devoice
Lexemes                                                          rule devoicelastcoda
phonation = voiceless
rule devoicelastsyll                      IF last coda
THEN rule devoice
IF last syll
rule devoicelastsyll         THEN rule devoicelastcoda

b
E   d
x@bEd                             x@     bE d
Figure 5: Final devoicing applied to the lexeme Gebed
Notice that rule definitions at each level are not context dependent: devoicelastcoda can
devoice the last coda of any syllable, not just the last one, and device can devoice any phoneme.
In a final example, we look at how a series of rules can be invoked together, using the example
of Danish nouns. As in most languages, Danish nouns can occur in singular and plural, but in
addition a definite article can be added to the end of the singular or plural form, e.g. mund
(mouth) - munden (the mouth); munder (mouths) - munderne (the mouths). In the singular the
definite article depends on the gender of the noun: -et is added to neuter nouns, -en to non-
neuter nouns. In the plural, first the ending -er is added, followed by the definite article -ne.
The operation of these two rules together in our framework is sketched in figure 6 3 .
6. Conclusions and further work
We have described a framework for lexical representation that is intended to provide a ba-
sis for a lexical knowledge base which is both theoretically and computationally satisfactory.
3
/O_o/ stands for lowered /O/.

Syllable Sequence
Lexemes
Syllable Sequence
rule definite
Lexemes
rule definite      IF singular
rule plural                                  THEN ...
add /O_o/                                  IF plural
rule plural
THEN add /n@/

mOnO_on@
mOnO_o
mOn O_o
mOn
Figure 6: Plural and definite rules applied to the Danish lexeme Mund /mOn/ mouth
Although the representation crosses traditional linguistic boundaries, the framework success-
fully accommodates a wide range of morphological and phonological phenomena in a uniform
manner. We make extensive use of inheritance to capture generalisations, motivated entirely
by regularities in the word form structures, rather than preconceptions such as ‘morpheme’ and
‘phoneme’. Nevertheless we find that we can identify powerful and linguistically interesting
generalisations.
Our principal areas of ongoing development and interest in this research are:

extending the coverage, both of lexemes and lexical phenomena (phonological rules, in-
flectional classes etc.). Currently, the framework has been used to describe small sample
fragments covering nouns and adjectives in Danish, Dutch, English, and Icelandic. The
DATR files of these fragments are available on
http://www.itri.brighton.ac.uk/ Carole.Tiberius/mlex.html;
extending the representation, upward to support derivation and compounding, and down-
ward to nonsegmental phonology, phonetics, prosody etc.;
introducing phonotactics;
introducing support for orthographic representations;
interfacing the lexical knowledge base to practical language engineering applications.

A final area of particular interest to us is the issue of resyllabification rules. We noted above
that our current representation includes ‘syllables’, such as s that are not phonologically valid.
Ideally, to construct a ‘proper’ word form structure these need to be merged into their adjacent
syllables. Similarly other syllable boundary phenomena, such as maximum onset, should be
addressed. The representation is sufficiently powerful to support such rearrangements of the
structure, and so one way to achieve this would be simply to introduce them as obligatory final
rules, applied to all word forms.
This approach is appealing because it avoids the need to formally distinguish a level of
’protosyllable’ representation for these incomplete structures, making it easier, for example to
treat resyllabified word forms as themselves inputs to later word formation processes. However,
currently, this remains a topic for future exploration.

References
A NDERSON S. (1988). Morphological theory. In F. N EWMEYER, Ed., Linguistics: the Cambridge
survey, volume 1, 146–191. Cambridge University Press.
B IRD S. & K LEIN E. (1990). Phonological events. Journal of Linguistics, 26.
C AHILL, L., C ARSON .-B ERNDSEN J. & G AZDAR G. (2000). Phonologically based lexical knowledge
representation. In F. VAN E YNDE & D. G IBBON, Eds., Lexicon Development for Speech and Natural
Language Processing, 77–114. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
C AHILL L. (1990). Syllable-based morphology for natural language processing. PhD thesis, School of
Cognitive Science and Computing Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton. also available as technical
report CSRP 181.
C AHILL L. (1993). Morphophonology in the lexicon. In Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference
on Computational Linguistics, 87–96.
C AHILL L. & G AZDAR G. (1997). The inflectional phonology of german adjectives, determiners and
pronouns. Linguistics, 35(2), 211–245.
C AHILL L. & G AZDAR G. (1999a). German noun inflection. Journal of Linguistics, 35, 1–42.
C AHILL L. & G AZDAR G. (1999b). The PolyLex architecture: multilingual lexicons for related lan-
guages. Traitement Automatique des Langues, 40(2), 5–23.
C HOMSKY N. & H ALLE M. (1968). The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper and Row.
C OLEMAN J. (1992). Synthesis by rule without segments or rewrite rules. In C. B ENOIT & G. BAILLY,
Eds., Talking Machines. Elsevier.
C ORBETT G. & F RASER N. (1993). Network morphology: A DATR account of russian nominal inflec-
tion. Journal of Linguistics, 29, 113–142.
E VANS R. & G AZDAR G. (1996). DATR: A language for lexical knowledge representation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 22(2), 167–216.
E VANS R., G AZDAR G. & W EIR D. (1995). Encoding lexicalized tree adjoining grammars with a
nonmonotonic inheritance hierarchy. In Proceedings of ACL95, 77–83.
E VANS R., G AZDAR G. & W EIR D. (2000). ’Lexical rules’ are just lexical rules. In A. A BEILLE &
O. R AMBOW, Eds., Tree Adjoining Grammars: linguistic, formal and computational properties, CSLI
Lecture Notes. University of Chicago Press.
G IBBON D. (1992). ILEX: a linguistic approach to computational lexica. In U. K LENK, Ed., Computatio
Linguae: Aufsatze zur algorithmischen und quantitativen Analyse der Sprache, volume Beiheft 73 of
Zeitschrift für Dialektologie und Linguistik, 32–53. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
M OHANAN K. (1986). Lexical Phonology. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
S METS M. & E VANS R. (1998). A compact encoding of a DTG grammar. In Proceedings of the 4th
Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-
phia, 164–167.
S TUMP G. (1993a). On rules of referral. Language, (69), 449–479.
S TUMP G. (1993b). Position classes and morphological theory. In G. B OOIJ & J.   VAN   M ARLE, Eds.,
Year Book of Morphology 1992, 129–180. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Z WICKY A. (1985). How to describe inflection. BLS, (11), 371–386.
Z WICKY A. (1990). Inflectional morphology as a (sub)component of grammar. In W. U. D RESSLER ,
H. C. L USCHÜTZKY, O.E. P FEIFFER , & J.R. R ENNISON, Ed., Contemporary Morphology, 217–236.
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
