
Comparing Constituency and Dependency
Representations for SMT Phrase-Extraction
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
National Centre for Language Technology, Dublin City University,
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland
{mhearne,sozdowska,jtinsley}@computing.dcu.ie
Résumé.          Nous évaluons le recours à des techniques de traduction à base de seg-
ments syntaxiquement motivés, seules ou en combinaison avec des techniques à base
de segments non motivés, et nous comparons les apports respectifs de l’analyse en con-
stituants et de l’analyse en dépendances dans ce cadre. À partir d’un corpus parallèle
Anglais–Français, nous construisons automatiquement deux corpus d’entraînement ar-
borés, en constituants et en dépendances, alignés au niveau sous-phrastique et en ex-
trayons des correspondances bilingues entre mots et syntagmes motivées syntaxique-
ment. Nous mesurons automatiquement la qualité de la traduction obtenue par un sys-
tème à base de segments. Les résultats montrent que la combinaison des correspon-
dances bilingues non motivées et motivées sur le plan syntaxique améliore la qualité de
la traduction quel que soit le type d’analyse considéré. Par ailleurs, le gain en qualité est
plus important avec le recours à l’analyse en dépendances au regard des constituants.
Abstract. We consider the value of replacing and/or combining string-based meth-
ods with syntax-based methods for phrase-based statistical machine translation (PB-
SMT), and we also consider the relative merits of using constituency-annotated vs.
dependency-annotated training data. We automatically derive two subtree-aligned tree-
banks, dependency-based and constituency-based, from a parallel English–French cor-
pus and extract syntactically motivated word- and phrase-pairs. We automatically mea-
sure PB-SMT quality. The results show that combining string-based and syntax-based
word- and phrase-pairs can improve translation quality irrespective of the type of syn-
tactic annotation. Furthermore, using dependency annotation yields greater translation
quality than constituency annotation for PB-SMT.
Mots-clés :         Traduction statistique à base de segments, annotation en consti-
tuants, annotation en dépendances, corpus parallèles arborés alignés au niveau sous-
phrastique.

Keywords:            PB-SMT, constituency annotation, dependency annotation, subtree-
aligned parallel treebanks.
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
1 Introduction
The standard technique used to induce translation models from parallel corpora (Koehn
et al., 2003) is not motivated by linguistic information. That is, all phrase-pairs compati-
ble with a given word-alignment for any sentence pair are extracted; the word-alignment
process is not syntax-aware and, generally, the only criterion for phrase-pair exclusion
is phrase length. It seems reasonable that the incorporation of linguistic knowledge into
the phrase-extraction process could yield better results, either because additional useful
phrase pairs could then be identified or because it would allow for the exclusion of less
useful phrase correspondences.
An experiment by Koehn et al. (2003) suggests that the latter hypothesis does not
hold true: when phrase-pairs not corresponding to syntactic constituents were discarded,
translation accuracy decreased. However, work presented by both Groves & Way (2005)
and Tinsley et al. (2007a) suggests that the first hypothesis is valid. In (Groves &
Way, 2005), phrase-pairs are extracted from sentence-aligned data by first chunking the
sentences monolingually using stop-word information and then aligning those chunks
using mutual information techniques together with relative chunk position information.
While replacing the standard phrase-pairs with these novel string-pairs led to a reduc-
tion in translation accuracy, combining both sets of phrase alignments gave improved
translation scores. (Tinsley et al., 2007a) took a somewhat different approach, first
constituency-parsing the training sentence pairs, then aligning node pairs using a statis-
tical tree aligner (Tinsley et al., 2007b) and finally extracting all string pairs dominated
by linked constituents. Again, replacing the standard phrase-pairs with these novel tree-
based pairs did not improve translation accuracy, but results increased when both sets
of phrase alignments were combined. Crucially, in these approaches, the extracted data
were not based on any a priori fixed word alignment. Thus, many new phrase-pairs not
discovered by the original method were made available during translation, resulting in
improved accuracy.
In this paper, we investigate the impact of variation in syntactic analysis type – specif-
ically, constituency parsing vs. dependency parsing – on the translation model induc-
tion technique introduced in (Tinsley et al., 2007a). Our experimental objective is to
compare the relative value of phrase-pairs which can be extracted from each type of
representation to phrase-based statistical machine translation (PB-SMT) by measuring
translation accuracy. Thus, we automatically construct two subtree-aligned parallel tree-
banks, one dependency-parsed and the other constituency-parsed, from a single parallel
corpus. We take a tree-aligner previously used only to align constituency trees and de-
scribe how we used it to align dependency trees. We induce phrase-translation models
from the resulting datasets and carry out translation experiments using the Moses de-
coder (Koehn et al., 2007). We evaluate the output using standard evaluation metrics
and present our findings.
Comparing Constituency and Dependency Representations for SMT Phrase-Extraction
2 Annotations, Data and Tools
The data annotation types we consider in this work are constituency parses and de-
pendency parses. In both cases, each sentence is tagged with part-of-speech informa-
tion, and in the case of dependency parses a lemma is also associated with each word.
Constituency parses, or context-free phrase-structure trees, make explicit syntactic con-
stituents (such as noun phrases (NP), verb phrases (VP) and prepositional phrases (PP))
identifiable in the sentence. An example of a constituency parse is given in Fig. 1, where
we see that the overall sentence comprises an NP followed by a VP, each of which has
some internal structure. Dependency parses make explicit the relationships between the
words in the sentence in terms of heads and dependents. An example of a dependency
parse is given in Fig. 2, where an arc from word wi to word wj indicates that wi is wj ’s
head and, correspondingly, wj is wi ’s dependent. These arcs are labelled such that the
label indicates the nature of the dependency – in the given example, the label on the arc
from is to information is labelled SUBJ indicating that information is the subject.

S

NP

VP

PP                                      VP                    (1)
NP                                                     NP                                          ADJP

DT                  NN              VBN        IN    DT      NNP           NNPS       VBZ                 JJ

the             information       forwarded     by   the    Member         States       is         satisfactory
subj
cprep
det
det                 adj           prep                                 nn                   atts
the          information         forwarded      by     the      Member               States   is     satisfactory

Det; the Nom; information Ppa; forward Prep; by Det; the Nom; member Nom; state V; be Adj; satisfactory               (2)

In the experiments we present here, we used the JOC English–French parallel corpus
provided within the framework of the ARCADE campaigns to evaluate sentence align-
ment and translation spotting (Chiao et al., 2006).1 The JOC corpus is composed of
texts published in 1993 as a section of the C Series of the Official Journal of the Eu-
ropean Community. It contains about 400,000 words corresponding to 8,759 aligned
sentences with an average sentence length of 23 words for English and 27.2 words for
French.
1
The JOC corpus is distributed by ELRA/ELDA (www.elda.org).
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
Two subtree-aligned parallel treebanks were automatically derived from this dataset us-
ing off-the-shelf tools (parsers and aligner). Each treebank comprises syntactic anno-
tations – constituency-based and dependency-based – and alignments between source
and target nodes which make explicit the translational equivalences between words
and phrases. For dependency parsing, we used the English and the French versions
of S YNTEX (Bourigault et al., 2005). For constituency parsing, we used Bikel’s sta-
tistical parser (Bikel, 2002) trained on the Penn II Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994) for
English and the Modified French Treebank (Schluter & van Genabith, 2007) for French.

VP

VP                      V         PP

V           NP               cliquez P        NP                              (3)
click    D     ADJ     N             sur D     N         ADJ

the Save As button               le bouton Enregistrer Sous
Previous work has seen the development of tools which automatically induce alignments
between parsed sentence pairs. Here, we use the tool described in (Tinsley et al., 2007b).
This tool is designed to discover an optimal set of alignments between any given, fixed
tree pair, independent of language pair and constituent labelling schema. It requires a
single external resource: the two word-alignment probability models output by GIZA++
(Och & Ney, 2003) when trained in both directions on parallel text for the language pair
being aligned.2
The tree-aligner works by hypothesising all possible alignments between the nodes in
the tree pair. It scores each of these hypotheses using the GIZA++ word-alignment
probabilities as described in detail in (Tinsley et al., 2007b). Using a greedy search,
it then iteratively selects the highest-scoring alignment hypothesis and eliminates all
hypotheses that conflict with it. The tree-alignment is complete when no non-zero-
scored, non-conflicting hypotheses remain. An example of a constituency parsed tree-
aligned sentence pair is given in Fig. 3.
The tree-aligner used here has not previously been used to align dependency structures.
These structures are not directly compatible with the aligner because the tool requires
that the input trees be in labelled, bracketed format. While the labels themselves can be
arbitrary and the branching-factor and depth of the tree are irrelevant – for instance, a
part-of-speech-tagged sentence with a single, arbitrary root label is perfectly acceptable
– it must be possible to associate each node in the tree with its corresponding surface
string. The output of the dependency parser, as shown in Fig. 2, does not directly
2
Minimally, this parallel text should comprise the sentence pairs from the parallel treebank being
aligned, but it can, of course, be extended to include all available parallel text for the language pair in
question.
Comparing Constituency and Dependency Representations for SMT Phrase-Extraction
meet this requirement and we must therefore convert the dependency-parsed data into a
bracketed structure that the aligner can handle. Note that this conversion is formal rather
than linguistic. As the aligner does not look inside node labels and our experiments
require only the extraction of string-pairs from the aligner output, we pack sufficient
information into the node labels such that the original dependency information is fully
recoverable from the bracketed structure.
The bracketed representation for the dependency structure in Fig. 2 is given in Fig. 4. In
this representation, each constituent is comprised of a head and its dependents arranged
as siblings in the order in which they occurred in the sentence. Each node label retains
the dependency information, indicating which child is head and the function of each
of its dependent children. The label formats for constituents and parts-of-speech are
index;head=index;func1 =index;...;funcn =index and index;tag;lemma respectively.
17;H=11;
subj=16;atts=12

16;H=5;
det=4;Adj=15

15;H=6;
prep=14

14;H=7;                                                  (4)
cprep=13

13;H=10;
nn=9;det=8

4;Det;     5;Nom;         6;Ppa;      7;Prep;    8;Det;        9;Nom;   10;Nom;   11;V;     12;Adj;
the    information     forward        by         the         member     state    be     satisfactory

the     information    forwarded       by         the         Member    States    is     satisfactory
The single feature of dependency parses which cannot be satisfactorily encoded in our
bracketed representation is non-projectivity. An example of a non-projective depen-
dency structure is given in Fig. 5. In our bracketed representation, each head and its
direct dependents are grouped as siblings under a single node according to the surface
word order. In Fig. 5, the relationship between the dependent not and its head has
been followed is correctly represented by the dashed line from the root constituent 15
to constituent 12. However, as this branch crosses the one between 13 and has, this
structure is not acceptable to the aligner. This forces us to compromise by attaching
the non-projective constituent to the lowest non-crossing parent constituent. Thus, the
dashed line in Fig. 5 is dropped and the dotted line linking 12 to 13 is inserted instead.
However, the true relationship is encoded in the node labelling: constituent 15’s label
records the fact that 13 is 12’s head.3

3
This analysis arises from the parser’s pre- and post-processing procedures, which result in deviations
from standard part-of-speech tagging.
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
15;H=13;
subj=14;adv=12

14;                                 13;V;
H=11;                           has been followed
det=10                                                                (5)
10;Det;               11;Nom;                  12;Adv
this                approach                   not

this                 approach      has          not          been   followed
3 Experiments
As described in previous sections, we have constructed three different versions of the
JOC English–French parallel corpus, the first containing aligned sentence pairs, the
second containing aligned constituency tree pairs and the third containing aligned de-
pendency structure pairs. While the dataset comprises 8759 pairs, 37 were discarded
because they could not be assigned an English and/or French constituency parse. The
dataset was then split into 1000 test/reference pairs and 7722 training pairs, and the
same split applied to all three versions. In all experiments presented here, the source
language is French and the target English.
Our experimental objective is to compare the value of phrase-pairs which can be ex-
tracted from the different dataset representations to PB-SMT by measuring translation
accuracy. All translation experiments are carried out using the Moses system (Koehn
et al., 2007). The evaluation metrics used are BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), NIST (Dod-
dington, 2002) and METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005). These metrics all compare
each output translation to a reference translation in terms of the substrings they have in
common.
3.1 Phrase-Table Computation
Phrase-pairs are extracted from the string-aligned training data by standard PB-SMT
techniques using the Moses system. Each sentence-pair is first word-aligned using
GIZA++ in both source-to-target and target-to-source directions. After obtaining the
intersection of these directional alignments, alignments from the union are also in-
serted; this insertion process is heuristics-driven (Koehn et al., 2003). Once the word-
alignments are finalised, all word- and phrase-pairs (overlapping and non-overlapping)
which are consistent with the word-alignment and which comprise 7 words or less are
extracted. Frequency counts for the extracted pairs are computed over the entire training
set. This dataset is henceforth referred to as STR.
Extracting phrase-pairs from the constituency-aligned and dependency-aligned datasets
involves extracting the string pairs dominated by each linked node pair in the treebank as
Comparing Constituency and Dependency Representations for SMT Phrase-Extraction
BLEU      NIST METEOR
STR               30.35    62.62 64.32
CON               29.97    63.19 63.59
DEP               29.90    63.32 64.11
STR+CON           31.98    65.16 65.61
STR+DEP           32.03    65.28 65.72
STR+CON+DEP       30.97    63.40 64.75

Table 1: Evaluation of translation accuracy using the extracted phrase-pair sets both
individually and in combination.
a word or phrase alignment (Tinsley et al., 2007a); all word- and phrase-pairs (overlap-
ping and non-overlapping) which are consistent with the tree-alignment are extracted.
Frequency counts for the extracted pairs are computed over the entire training set. These
datasets are henceforth referred to as CON and DEP.

3.2 Results
We compute a variety of final phrase-tables based on combinations of the STR, CON and
DEP phrase-pair sets. In all cases, the final probabilities assigned are relative frequencies
based on the frequency counts from each dataset being included. The results of our
experiments are presented in Tab. 1. In analysing our results, we considered both the
value of replacing and/or combining string-based methods with syntax-based methods,
and also the relative merits of using constituency-annotated vs. dependency-annotated
data for PB-SMT. Our observations are as follows:
– replacing the standard string-based phrase-extraction method with either of the
syntax-based methods (STR and CON in Tab. 1) tends to result in a decrease in
translation accuracy, respectively 1.78% and 1.24% relative decrease in BLEU,
1.24% and 0.5% in METEOR;
– combining the standard string-based phrase-extraction method with either of the
syntax-based methods (STR+CON and STR+DEP) leads to improved translation
accuracy, respectively 5.04% and 5.34% relative increase in BLEU, 3.86% and
3.91% in NIST and 1.97% and 2.15% in METEOR;
– combining all three approaches (STR+CON+DEP) does not yield greater accu-
racy than combining STR with just one of the syntax-based phrase-tables: over
STR+CON, the relative increases are of 0.06% and 0.09% in BLEU and NIST
respectively; over STR+DEP, there is a relative increase of 0.05% in NIST;
– annotating the training data with dependency structures generally yields greater
translation accuracy than annotating it with constituency structures for PB-SMT:
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
DEP outperforms CON by 0.17% for NIST and by 0.74% for BLEU; STR+DEP
outperforms STR+CON according to all metrics by between 0.05% and 0.28%.
In some instances, the evaluation metrics give conflicting results for the same system
output. For example, we see that for BLEU, CON improves over DEP, but the opposite
is true for NIST and METEOR. No one measure in particular is accepted as being most
reliable. However, it is generally accepted that a significant increase, or decrease, in
all three metrics is conclusive. A clear-cut increase in all scores can be observed only
when combining the string-based method with either of the syntax-based methods. All
other combinations show a general trend toward preferring the dependency annotation
without the results being conclusive.
A potential explanation for this latter observation may lie in differences between those
phrase-pair types which were extracted from one parallel treebank but not the other. Pre-
vious experiments have shown that shorter phrase-pairs have greater impact on transla-
tion accuracy (Koehn et al., 2003). While fewer unique phrase-pair types were ex-
tracted from the dependency-annotated treebank (15,078, vs. 20,571 phrase-pair types
which occurred in the constituency-annotated treebank only) these phrases are shorter
on average (5.67 vs. 9.98 tokens per phrase) and may go some way towards explaining
the overall preference for the dependency parses. Furthermore, there are more linked
constituency-based phrases (66,601 for English and 67,280 for French vs. 64,904 and
64,135 respectively for the dependency-based phrases). This higher alignment coverage
may lead to lower accuracy, thus having a negative impact on translation quality.
Of course, differing translation accuracies may also be due to differences between the
monolingual parses generated, either because of inherent divergences between the de-
pendency and constituency representations or because of disparities in parser accuracy.
Regarding the quality of the parsers, the reported accuracies are reversed according
to language: reported f-scores for the constituency parser are 90% for English (Bikel,
2002) and 80% for French (Schluter & van Genabith, 2007), whereas reported f-scores
for the dependency parser are 82% for English and 89% for French (Ozdowska, 2006)4.
However, these scores were obtained for datasets not directly comparable to the one
used here. As we do not have gold-standard parses for our dataset, we cannot report
parse accuracy figures, but it is nevertheless clear that the syntactic representations for
each monolingual dataset differed significantly. A quantitative comparison of the En-
glish non-POS constituents output (i.e. constituents spanning more than 1 word) shows
that 52% were unique to the constituency-parser output and that 38.9% were unique
to the dependency-parser output; the same analysis of the French constituents shows
46.6% unique to the constituency-parser output and 42.7% unique to the dependency-
parser output. We hope that further analysis will shed more light on the importance of
this issue.
4
See (Paroubek et al., 2007) for a standard evaluation of parsers for French, including S YNTEX.
Comparing Constituency and Dependency Representations for SMT Phrase-Extraction
4 Conclusions and Future Work
We observe that PB-SMT benefits from syntactically motivated word- and phrase-pairs
derived out of constituency-annotated and dependency-annotated subtree-aligned tree-
banks with a general trend towards preferring the dependency representation. Combin-
ing string-based extraction with either of the constituency-based or dependency-based
extraction results in significantly improved translation quality over a baseline string-
based extraction. However, combining all three extraction methods does not yield
greater accuracy. Comparing constituency annotations vs. dependency annotations, we
conclude that dependency-based extraction performs significantly better either individ-
ually or in conjunction with string-based extraction.
In future work, we plan to scale up these experiments and analyse the relative impact of
the different types of constituents for which phrase pairs are extracted in order to gain
further insights into the usefulness of syntactic information for PB-SMT. We will also
look in more detail at the issue of relative phrase length.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Natalie Schluter for providing us with the Modified French Treebank and the French
language package for Bikel’s parser. Thanks to Ventsislav Zhechev for his assistance with the
tree aligner. Thanks also to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. This work
was funded by Science Foundation Ireland grants 05/RF/CMS064 and 05/IN/1732.

References
BANERJEE S. & L AVIE A. (2005). METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. In Proceedings of Workshop on Intrinsic and
Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or Summarization at the 43th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-05), p. 65–72, Ann Arbor, MI.
B IKEL D. M. (2002). Design of a Multi-lingual, Parallel-processing Statistical Parsing Engine.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Human Language Technology Research,
p. 24–27, San Francisco, CA.
B OURIGAULT D., FABRE C., F RÉROT C., JACQUES M.-P. & O ZDOWSKA S. (2005).
S YNTEX , analyseur syntaxique de corpus. In Atelier EASy, Actes de la Conférence Traite-
ment Automatique des Langues Naturelles, Dourdan, France.
C HIAO Y.-C., K RAIF O., L AURENT D., N GUYEN T. M. H., S EMMAR N., S TUCK F., V ÉRO -
NIS J. & Z AGHOUANI W. (2006). Evaluation of multilingual text alignment systems: the AR-
CADE II project. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’06), p. 1975–1978, Genoa, Italy.
D ODDINGTON G. (2002). Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation Quality Using N-
gram Co-Occurrence Statistics. In Human Language Technology: Notebook Proceedings, p.
128–132, San Diego, CA.
Mary Hearne, Sylwia Ozdowska and John Tinsley
G ROVES D. & WAY A. (2005). Hybrid Example-Based SMT: the Best of Both Worlds?
In Proceedings of ACL 2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts: Data-Driven
Machine Translation and Beyond, p. 183–190, Ann Arbor, MI.

KOEHN P., H OANG H., B IRCH A., C ALLISON -B URCH C., F EDERICO M., B ERTOLDI N.,
C OWAN B., S HEN W., M ORAN C., Z ENS R., DYER C., B OJAR O., C ONSTANTIN A. &
H ERBST E. (2007). Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), demonstration session, p.
177–180, Prague, Czech Republic.

KOEHN P., O CH F. J. & M ARCU D. (2003). Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Human Language Technology (NAACL ’03), p. 48–54, Edmonton,
Canada.

M ARCUS M., K IM G., M ARCINKIEWICZ M. A., M AC I NTYRE R., B IES A., F ERGUSON M.,
K ATZ K. & S CHASBERGER B. (1994). The Penn Treebank: Annotating Predicate Argument
Structure. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology, p. 110–115,
Princeton, NJ.

O CH F. J. & N EY H. (2003). A Systematic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1), 19–51.

O ZDOWSKA S. (2006). A LIBI , un système d’ALIgnement BIlingue à base de règles de propa-
gation syntaxique. Phd. Thesis, University Toulouse-Le Mirail, France.

PAPINENI K., ROUKOS S., WARD T. & Z HU W.-J. (2002). BLEU: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-02), p. 311–318, Philadelphia, PA.

PAROUBEK P., V ILNAT A., ROBBA I. & AYACHE C. (2007). Les résultats de la campagne
EASy d’évaluation des analyseurs syntaxiques du français. In Actes de la Conférence Traite-
ment Automatique des Langues Naturelles, Toulouse, France.

S CHLUTER N. & VAN G ENABITH J. (2007). Preparing, Restructuring and Augmenting a
French Treebank: Lexicalised Parsing or Coherent Treebanks? In Proceedings of the 10th
Conference of the Pacific Association of Computational Linguistics (PACLING 2007), Mel-
bourne, Australia.

T INSLEY J., H EARNE M. & WAY A. (2007a). Exploiting Parallel Treebanks to Improve
Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of The Sixth International Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT-07), Bergen, Norway.

T INSLEY J., Z HECHEV V., H EARNE M. & WAY A. (2007b). Robust Language Pair-
Independent Sub-Tree Alignment. In Proceedings of MT Summit XI, Copenhagen, Denmark.
