WEAK TRANSLATION PROBLEMS – A CASE STUDY OF SCRIPTURAL TRANSLATION
Weak Translation Problems – a case study of Scriptural Translation

M. G. Abbas Malik1 Christian Boitet1 Pushpak Bhattacharyya2 Laurent Besacier1

(1) GETALP-LIG, Université de Grenoble (UJF), France
(2) Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IITB), India
Abbas.Malik@imag.fr, Christian.Boitet@imag.fr, pb@iitb.ac.in, Laurent.Besacier@imag.fr
Résumé         La TA généraliste de haute qualité et totalement automatique est considérée comme
impossible. Nous nous intéressons aux problèmes de traduction scripturale, qui sont des sous-problèmes
faibles du problème général de la traduction. Nous présentons les caractéristiques des problèmes faibles de
traduction et les problèmes de traduction scripturale, décrivons différentes approches computationnelles (à
états finis, statistiques, et hybrides) et présentons nos résultats sur différentes combinaisons de langues et
systèmes d’écriture Indo-Pak.

Abstract General purpose, high quality and fully automatic MT is believed to be impossible. We are
interested in scriptural translation problems, which are weak sub-problems of the general problem of
translation. We introduce the characteristics of the weak problems of translation and of the scriptural
translation problems, describe different computational approaches (finite-state, statistical and hybrid) to
solve these problems, and report our results on several combinations of Indo-Pak languages and writing
systems.

Mots-clés : problèmes faibles de traduction, traduction scripturale, traduction interdialectal,
transcriptions, translittérations
Keywords: weak problems of translation, scriptural translation, interdialectal translation,
transcription, transliteration

1 Introduction
We say that a problem of translation is weak if the sentence correspondence defined by that problem is
such that there is always a very small number of target sentences corresponding to a given source
sentence, if it is presented in isolation, and almost always only 1 target sentence in a given context. On the
contrary, a general translation problem is strong because the number of target sentences corresponding to a
source sentence of length n can be exponential (kn for some k), even in the context of a connected text.
Such weak translation problems include (1) transliteration or/and transcription between 2 scripts, which
we call “scriptural translation”, (2) phonetic transcription, and (3) interdialectal translation, that implies
lexical changes. Table 1 gives a list of some generic and specific sub-problems of weak translation
problems and their instances in increasing complexity and difficulty order.
In this paper, we concentrate only on scriptural translation problems, because they are important in
practice, especially for many Indo-Pak languages (that are spoken both in India and Pakistan), but also for
other languages like Malay, Mongolian and many languages of Central Asia. Scriptural translation
problems are significant because they create a scriptural divide that often reinforces political divisions and
mutual misunderstandings, even if communities using different scripts perfectly understand each other
M. G. ABBAS MALIK, CHRISTIAN BOITET, PUSHPAK BHATTACHARYYA, LAURENT BESACIER
orally. In the case of the Indo-Pak languages (Hindi, Urdu, Punjabi, Seraiki, Sindhi and Kashmiri), these
languages have more than 1178 million speakers around the world, more than the total population of
Europe.
Generic sub-problems       Specific sub-problems                               Instances                 Constraints
Language localization Word for word translation               Québecois – French                     SL = TL
Intralingual translation                Malay – Indonesian                     SW = TW
Scriptural translation     Transliteration                    Punjabi/Shahmukhi – Punjabi/Gurmukhi   SL = TL
Transcription                      Malay/Roman – Malay/Jawi               SW ≠ TW
Phonetic transcription
French/Roman – French/IPA
Transliteration                    Hindi – Urdu                           SL ≠ TL
Transcription                      Bengali – Assamese                     SW ≠ TW
Hindi – Marathi
Interdialectal translation Word for word translation          Québecois – French                     SL = TL
Intralingual translation           English (UK) – English (USA)           SW = TW
Scriptural translation
Punjabi/Shahmukhi – Punjabi/Gurmukhi   SL = TL
Malay/Jawi – Indonesian/Latin          SW ≠ TW
Bilingual translation      Word for word translation          Bengali – Assamese                     SL ≠ TL
Scriptural translation             Hindi – Marathi                        SW ≠ TW
Bilingual translation between
SL = source language, TL = target language, SW = source writing system, TW = target writing system
Table 1. Sub-problems of weak translation (by order of increasing complexity)

2 Scriptural Translation
Scriptural translation is the process of transcribing a word written in the source language script into the
target language script by preserving its articulation in the original language in such a way that the native
speaker of the target language can produce the original pronunciation. It is a weak translation problem for
Indo-Pak languages, but it is a strong translation problem Japanese-English and French-Chinese scriptural
translation. An example of Hindi-Urdu scriptural translation is shown in Figure 1.
It differs from general transliteration in various aspects.
Usually, transliteration handles only Out-Of-Vocabulary
(OOV) words, Named Entities (NEs), etc. On the other
hand, scriptural translation must handle all kinds of words
irrespective of their type and it provides basis for Cross-
Scriptural Machine Translation (CSMT), Cross-Scriptural     Figure 1. Hindi–Urdu Example Sentence
Information Retrieval (CSIR), Cross-Scriptural Application
Development (CSAD), Inter-dialectal Machine Translation (IMT), Cross-Dialectal Information Retrieval
(CDIR) and for solving the weak translation problems.
Scriptural translation problems are quite interesting theoretically because they often cannot be solved by a
simple character-to-character replacement method. Even in their weak instances (such as Hindi-Urdu
scriptural translation), they may be complex (need more than usual Finite-State Transducers (FST) to
reach a quality high enough for real usage) and difficult (require human work to build resources, and
expert knowledge). They offer the advantage that measures of accuracy based on references are valid, as
there is in general only one “good” translation, which can serve as a reference.
WEAK TRANSLATION PROBLEMS – A CASE STUDY OF SCRIPTURAL TRANSLATION

2.1 Challenges for scriptural translation
2.1.1      Scriptural divide
There exists a written communication gap between people who can understand each other verbally but
cannot read each other. They are virtually divided and become scriptural aliens. Examples are the Hindi &
Urdu communities, the Punjabi/Shahmukhi & Punjabi/Gurmukhi communities, etc. An example of
scriptural divide is shown in Figure 1.

2.1.2      Under-resourcedness
Under-resourcedness of a source or target language is a big challenge for scriptural translation. The lack
of standards in writing practices or code page for a language makes scriptural translation very hard. The
existence of different writing systems for a language results in a large number of variants and it becomes
difficult and complex to handle them. For example, Punjabi is the largest language of Pakistan (more than
70 million), but there existed only two magazines in 1992 (Rahman 1997). In the words of (Rahman
2004), “… there is little development in Punjabi, Pashto, Balochi and other languages…”. (Malik 2005)
reports the first effort towards establishing a standard code page for Punjabi/Shahmukhi, and there is none
yet for Shahmukhi. The Kashmiri and Seraiki languages are similarly under-resourced.

2.1.3      Missing necessary information
In some cases, the necessary and vital information for scriptural translation is missing in the source text.
For example, the first word of the example sentence of Figure 1 ‫[ دﻧﻴﺎ‬ḓʊnɪjɑ] (world) misses essential
information that is obligatory to do Urdu to Hindi transliteration. Diacritical marks are part of the writing
system but are sparingly used in writings (Zia 1999). Figure 2(a) and 2 (b) show the correct and the wrong
Hindi transliteration of the example Urdu word respectively.
Figure 2. Example of absence of information

2.1.4      Dissimilar spelling conventions
Different spelling conventions exist across different scripts used for the same language or for different
languages because users of a script have learned to write certain words in a traditional way. For example,
the words ‫[ ﻳہ‬je] (this) = ‫[ ﯼ‬j] + ‫[ ﮦ‬h] and ‫[ وﮦ‬vo] (that) = ‫[ و‬v] + ‫[ ﮦ‬h] are used in Urdu and
Punjabi/Shahmukhi. The character ‫[ ﮦ‬h] produces the vowel sounds [e] and [o] in the example words
respectively. On the other hand, the example words are written as ये [je] & वो [vo] and ਯੇ [je] & ਵੋ [vo] in
Devanagari and Gurmukhi, respectively. There exist a large number of such different conventions between
Punjabi/Shahmukhi–Punjabi Gurmukhi, Hindi–Urdu, etc.
Different spelling conventions are also driven by different religious influences on different communities.
In the Indian sub-continent, Hindi is a part of the Hindu identity, while Urdu is a part of the Muslim
identity1 (Rahman 1997; Rai 2000). Hindi derives its vocabulary from Sanskrit, while Urdu borrows its

1
The Hindi movement of the late 19th century played a central role in the ideologization of Hindi. The movement started in
reaction to the British Act 29 of 1837 by which Persian was replaced by Hindustani/Urdu, written in Persian script, as the
M. G. ABBAS MALIK, CHRISTIAN BOITET, PUSHPAK BHATTACHARYYA, LAURENT BESACIER
literary and scientific vocabulary from Persian and Arabic. Hindi and Urdu not only borrow from Sanskrit
and Persian/Arabic, but also adopt the original spellings of the borrowed word due the sacredness of the
original language. These differences make scriptural translation across scripts, dialects or languages more
challenging and complex.

2.1.5 Transliteration and Transcription Ambiguities
Transliteration or transcription at character level across different scripts is ambiguous. For example, a
Sindhi word ‫[اِﻧﺴﺎن‬ɪɲsɑn] (human being) can be transliterated into Devanagari either as इंसान [ɪɲsɑn] or इसान
[ɪnsɑn] (* means wrong spelling). The transliteration process of the word from Sindhi to Devanagari is
shown in Figure 3(a). The transliteration of the third character from the left, Noon (‫[ )ن‬n] is ambiguous
because in the middle of a word, Noon may represent a consonant [n] or the nasalization [ɲ] of a vowel.

In the reverse direction, the Sindhi Devanagari word इंसान
[ɪɲsɑn] can be transliterated into a set of possible
transliterations [‫اِﻧﺴﺎن‬, ‫*اِﻧﺼﺎن‬, ‫ ;]*اِﻧﺜﺎن‬all of these possible
transliterations have the same pronunciation [ɪɲsɑn] but have
different spellings in the Perso-Arabic script, as shown in Figure 3. Sindhi Transliteration Example
Figure 3(b). Similar kinds of ambiguities also arise for other
pairs of scripts or languages. Thus transliteration ambiguities increase the complexity and hardness of the
scriptural translation across scripts of the same language or of different languages.

3 Computational Models
Figure 4 shows different computational models employed for scriptural translation, discussed later.
(a) FST Model (Malik et al. 2008)             (b) SMT Model
(c) Hybrid Model (Malik et al. 2009)
Figure 4. System architectures of different models for scriptural translation

3.1 Finite-state scriptural translation system using UIT
Universal Intermediate Transcription (UIT) is a multipurpose pivot. It is used as a phonetico-morphotactic
intermediate representation for the surface morphotactic translation or scriptural translation. It is a
deterministic and an unambiguous scheme of transcription for Indo-Pak languages based on Speech

official vernacular of the courts of law in North India. It is the moment in history, when Hindi and Urdu started to emerge as
Hindu and Muslim identities.
WEAK TRANSLATION PROBLEMS – A CASE STUDY OF SCRIPTURAL TRANSLATION
Assessment Methods Phonetic Alphabet (SAMPA) in ASCII range 32–126, since a text in this range is
portable across computers and operating systems (Hieronymus 1993; Wells 1995).
In our finite-state model, UIT serves the purpose of a phonetico-scriptural pivot. The source text is
converted into its UIT representation and this UIT representation is then transformed into the target text.
Therefore, scriptural translation is a “double translation”. We have used FST to perform these two
scriptural translations. Our FST model is shown in Figure 4(a) and fully discussed in (Malik et al. 2008).
We have developed FSTs for this double translation for Hindi-Urdu, Punjabi and Seraiki.

3.2 SMT systems
SMT systems are direct translation systems for the Hindi-Urdu pair. They have been developed from a
parallel lexicon containing 50,000 Hindi-Urdu words. Each parallel entry contains Hindi and Urdu
scripturally parallel words. A space has been introduced after each character in each Hindi and Urdu
parallel word to develop Hindi-Urdu parallel training data at characters-level. In character-level SMT
systems, a character is a translation unit, exactly like a word in an SMT system for the English-French
pair, developed from English-French parallel corpora.
We have also developed an expert clustering algorithm to build cluster-level parallel training data. A
cluster is a set of characters that must be considered as one translation unit. For example, in Punjabi, an
aspirated consonant is written as a combination of the consonant to be aspirated and HEH-
DOACHASHMI (‫)ه‬, and these two characters must be considered as one translation unit for scriptural
translation. Therefore, we have two types of SMT systems, (1) character-level and (2) cluster-level. To
check the effect of different parameters on our SMT systems, like reordering and tuning, we have varied
these parameters during the development phase. In short, we have developed 12 SMT systems for Hindi to
Urdu scriptural translation, and another set of 12 SMT systems for Urdu to Hindi scriptural translation.

3.3 Hybrid model
In the case of Indo-Pak languages, Urdu, Seraiki and Punjabi are written in Pakistan in a derivation of the
Persio-Arabic script. Like for Arabic, people do not usually use the diacritical marks, which contain very
crucial information to perform scriptural translation from that script to the other script used (usually a
variant of Devanagari). Our FST model is a kind of expert system, and missing information badly affects
its performance. On the other hand, SMT is a data-driven model, but the results are still not satisfactory as
far as usability in real context is considered.
To compensate the absence of necessary information and produce sufficient results, we have proposed a
hybrid model (Malik et al. 2009). This model is a multilevel process. It firsts performs the scriptural
translation of the source text in the target language/script and relates each source word with a set of target
words. The cardinality of this relation is 1 in most cases, but can reach at maximum of 4. The target
language model is used as a statistical filter that uses the target language knowledge to filter out incorrect
solutions and produce the correct one. The concept of our hybrid model is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Statistical disambiguation process
M. G. ABBAS MALIK, CHRISTIAN BOITET, PUSHPAK BHATTACHARYYA, LAURENT BESACIER

4 Results
For automatic testing purposes, we manually developed a Hindi-Urdu test corpus, containing 200
sentences (4,250 words). We randomly selected 200 sentences from our Hindi corpus and then translated
them into Urdu. The results of our different computational models are given in Table 2. For SMT, we have
only reported the best results.

Urdu source with diacritics                  Urdu source without diacritics
Model         Word Accuracy    Sentence Accuracy      Word Accuracy                 Sentence Accuracy
Finite-state system        83.9%                10%                        53%                      1%
Statistical system         72.2%               5.5%                        77%                      5%
Hybrid system              85.8%                14%                       79.1%                     7%
Table 2. Urdu to Hindi scriptural translation results

5 Conclusion
The weak translation problems are sub-problems of translation that only admit a very small set of correct
solutions, in general only one, for a given source sentence in a given context. Scriptural translation, a
weak sub-problem of translation, is almost always a weak problem. Three approaches have been employed
to solve scriptural translation problems and results have been reported for Urdu to Hindi scriptural
translation. We found that the hybrid approach gives better results than the FST and SMT approaches. The
analysis of scriptural translation leads to the conclusion that the weak translation problems, which seemed
to be simple on the first hand, can be complex and hard problems.

References
HIERONYMUS; (1993). Ascii Phonetic Symbols for the World's Languages: Worldbet, AT&T Bell
Laboratories.
MALIK; (2005). Towards a Unicode Compatible Punjabi Character Set. 27th Internationalization and
Unicode Conference, Berlin.
MALIK, BESACIER, BOITET and BHATTACHARYYA; (2009). A Hybrid Model for Urdu Hindi
Transliteration. Joint conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of the
Asian Federation of NLP ACL/IJCNLP Workshop on Named Entities (NEWS-09), Singapore.
MALIK, BOITET and BHATTACHARYYA; (2008). Hindi Urdu Machine Transliteration Using Finite-State
Transducers. 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING),
Manchester, ICCL.
RAHMAN; (1997). Language and Politics in Pakistan. Lahore, Oxford University Press.
RAHMAN; (2004). Language Policy and Localization in Pakistan: Proposal for a Paradigmatic Shift.
Crossing the Digital Divide, SCALLA Conference on Computational Linguistics, Katmandu.
RAI; (2000). Hindi Nationalism. New Delhi, Orient Longman Private Limited.
WELLS;     (1995)      Computer-Coding       the    Ipa:   A    Proposed     Extension     of  Sampa.
www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/sampa.
ZIA; (1999). Standard Code Table for Urdu. 4th Symposium on Multilingual Information Processing
(MLIT-4), Yangon, CICC.
