TALN 2010, Montréal, 19-23 juillet 2010

M02: Translation of Structured Terminology-Rich Text

Graham Russell
Onscope Group Inc., 651 Notre-Dame Ouest, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 1J1
grussell@onscope.com

Résumé. Description de M02, un systeme d’aide a la traduction concu pour le traitement de textes
structures ou semi-structures avec une forte proportion de contenu terminologique. Le systeme comporte
une mémoire de traduction collaborative, qui atteint un niveau élevé de rappel grace a l’analyse sous-
phrastique; il fournit également des dispositifs de communication et de revision. Le systeme est en pro-
duction et traduit 140 000 mots par semaine.

Abstract. Description of M02, a translation support system designed for texts exhibiting a high
proportion of structured and semi-structured terminological content. The system comprises a web-based
collaborative translation memory, with high recall via subsentential linguistic analysis and facilities for
messaging and quality assurance. It is in production use, translating some 140,000 words per week.

M0tS-CléS I Aides a la traduction, sous-langage, analyse conceptuelle.

Keywords: Translation aids, sublanguage, conceptual analysis.

1 Introduction

This article describes M02, a translation support system designed for high-volume processing of structured
terminology-rich text. By this we mean texts such as catalogues, customs declarations, descriptions of
products and services, and so on. Documents of this kind typically contain a large proportion of term-like
nominal phrases arranged in list structures and linked by expressions representing a relatively restricted
range of semantic relations. An example is shown below :

Métaux précieux et leurs alliages autres qu’a usage dentaire ; joaillerie, bijouterie, pierres précieuses,
horlogerie et autres instruments chronométriques nommément montres et chronométres; cuir et imita-
tions du cuir; peaux d’animaux; malles et valises; parapluies, parasols et Cannes; fouets et sellerie;
vétements nommément Chemises, pantalons, lingerie de corps, manteaux, gants, mitaines, costumes,
costumes de mascarades, vestes, bas, chandails; chaussures (a l’exception des chaussures orthope-
diques) nommément bottes, sandales, souliers, chaussures de sport, souliers de gymnastique, mocas-
sins, sabots ; chapellerie nommément chapeaux, bérets, casquettes visiéres, bonnets.

Such texts are sufﬁciently homogeneous in style and syntax to permit sublanguage approaches to linguistic
analysis.

GRAHAM RUSSELL

2 The System

2.1 Background

M02 is currently in production use under a contract from the Canadian Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (CIPO)
for the translation of trade-mark descriptions between English and French. The relevant text describes the
areas of activity (products and services) for which the mark is claimed, and has the form illustrated above.

The system has been in operation since February 2007, with almost 20 million words translated to date.
Currently, approximately 140,000 words are translated per week; some 1,000 new marks are ﬁled each
week, and 600 modiﬁed. The fact that a third of the input takes the form of modiﬁcations to existing marks
makes the translation memory approach (section 2.4) particularly advantageous.

The system is bidirectional, translation being performed both from English to French and from French to
English. The former direction dominates in terms of volume, however. M02 is web-based and accessible
to remote users.

2.2 Work Flow

The translation process proper follows a conventional pattern :
1. Text analysis : input text is segmented and analysed.

2. Pretranslation : where available, each source-language segment is paired with the best candidate
translation drawn from the translation memory.

3. Translation : the translator considers alternative translations from the memory or provides a new one
where appropriate.

4. First revision (terminology)
5. Second revision (structure)
6. Modiﬁcation of the memory : any new equivalents or changes in status are recorded.

Only the ﬁrst of these steps, described in section 2.3, differs signiﬁcantly from the normal context of
translation memory use.

Additional facilities are provided for project management (section 2.5.1) and communication between
members of the translation team and revisers (section 2.5.2).

2.3 Text Analysis

Input text is analysed in greater detail than is normal with commercially deployed translation memories.
Couturier et al. (2006) give an overview of some of the methods employed.

Brieﬂy, a mixture of symbolic and statistical techniques are applied in a ﬁne-grained segmentation process
which identiﬁes candidates for minimal translation units. The latter are typically single words or short
multiword expressions, and often correspond to independently motivated terms. Sample results of this
stage of the process can be seen in the source-language column of ﬁgure 1. Additionally, certain semantic

MOZ2 TRANSLATION OF STRUCTURED TERMINOLOGY-RICH TEXT

HYPONYM Produits alimentaires nommément marinades, oeufs, bouillons, ...
USER Medicated tooth whitening kit for use by dental professionals
DOMAIN Computer software for use in the ﬁelds of transportation management and supply
chain management
NEGATION Machines a écrire et articles de bureau (2‘1l’exception des meubles)

TAB. 1 — Some semantic relations and associated lexical cues

relations between segments are detected, based on the presence of lexical-syntactic patterns ; table 1 gives
some examples.

The same approach underlies other applications in the trademark domain at Onscope : text classiﬁcation
and ﬁltering of search results both exploit the detailed information thus obtained.

2.4 Translation Memory

The translation memory contains entries for terms and other expressions occurring in trademark texts. In
use, the translator is presented with the result of an automatic pretranslation phase, in which source-text
segments have where possible been assigned candidate translations. Figure 1 shows a typical conﬁguration.

In practice, pretranslation recall is often very high, for a number of reasons. The input texts are by their
nature repetitive and formulaic ; moreover, as noted in section 2.1, a signiﬁcant portion of the input consists
of revisions to previously translated texts, whose content has therefore already been stored in the memory.
In addition, the fact that the segments involved are typically much shorter than the clauses forming the
basis of most translation memories allows for less variation and thus makes retrieval of an exact match
more likely; even when an entire sentence is not present in the memory, some of its components may be.

Alternate translations found in the memory are available in a pop-up window when required; each is
annotated with its status (for example, whether it is a standard equivalent term, has been approved by an
in-house terminologist, has been accepted in a previous translation, etc.) Status may be changed, marking
a given translation as standard or preferred, or even removing one from the memory if it is found to be
unsuitable.

User-initiated searches with the translation memory are also provided for, allowing a translator to view all
occurrences of a given expression in context.

When a translation is complete, newly translated segments are inserted into the translation memory ; since
its inception, the CIPO application has created a translation memory of around 3.5 million segments.

2.5 Auxiliary Functions

2.5.1 Management

A project manager’s interface supports assignment of tasks to available translators, and provides access to
automatically tabulated translator performance statistics and progress data.

GRAHAM RUSSELL

011,312,205 2IJiJr.IJI?.3IJi-1 YOU'RE Tl-lE GAME :12ss words} |< a. l .3 :3 3| |< or ID) 3| Trmslats ‘
Outils at lnstrirnents a main erlralnés manLie|lemei1t. normiemerit pumps 9 main, algiiilles cla gorllage D4.'Il.|iQ0l'fﬂ'aLl‘5.g|Jl‘Il9l.|iSl,lI‘I51ZI‘lJ|TleI'lT a malnl.oegorifleurlinsn1.imei1t is me
plnces, armes blsinches, clseauvt, cisailes_toni'._1euses 9 gatrruri Si main Appare pour in renregisnernont. la transmission ou la reproduction ou_s_on ou des images, magnetoscop
Wales 1]
outils at inslrun'ierii:s a main enlrahes manuelement, nommémerit pompe 3 main, , lnols and manuaihr-operated insln.imei'Jts, namelyhand pump, needles for
siiguilles de gonﬁage Duur gunl1eLls.gonrleurs(insLrument la main ]. degorllleur ' Eitrars, Lire inrlators [hand-held instruments J. deliators [ l1Eind—l1eld inslru
i; instrument a main 1, -:|est outils ji, pinces, airnes blancnr-:-s, C|5eﬂUi(, cisaille-s, eysl tools 3, pliers, bladed items, scissors, shears, push lawn mowers
tontleuses a oazon a main
Wales {2}

| appareils ]h I. 3DDElraU.IS

F‘ new 1! L W

| Penregistrement _ J |._recording

|_ is Lransmi ssion ii Llransrrassuon

| ou ] |. m

| la reproduction  |. reproduction

|—du son ] |.. sound

|_ ou ] L. or

| des images _ J} |. images

I rnagneloscuues . ]'i;. |.v1cleo recorders

| nommémem ] '1. |. namely

|—|ecteurs dird _ ] |. DVD players

| Iecteurs de rnusique rmﬂ _ ] |. MP3 rrusic players

I appareils II |- 3DEIﬁI‘a|U.IS

F pour ] I l, for

3 I .........-.

Tools and manually-operated instruments. namely hand pump, needles for filling for tire inflarors, tire inflarors (nan-:l—held instruments], cieflaiors lhand-nelu instrLrnentsl_ keys tlools
,pusl'i lawn mowers ﬁuppat‘ﬂlJ'S for ri recordi ng_ transmissl on or reproduction sound or images video recorders, namely DVD players, MP3 rmsic players,

.......... .... .-. ...... ... ... .... .- ...... |:n.......-. . . ....... _.... .... ... _......-......... . .

I l-. -..:o.....-.-...

 

   

FIG. 1 — Moz translation editing interface immediately after pretranslation : source text to the left, target
to the right, medallion icons indicating approved terminological equivalents. Original source text is shown
above, and the current state of the target text below the main display.

2.5.2 Communications

During the translation phase, the translator may annotate a segment with comments or queries to be viewed
by a revisor or other members of the translation team. Items needing special attention from a revisor may
be optionally ﬂagged. Similar annotations may also be created for a document as a whole.

A separate interface is available for off—line discussion of terminology questions by team members ; these
are recorded for later reference.

In some circumstances it is necessary to communicate with the client in order to clarify or correct the input
text; a third dedicated communication facility is provided for this purpose.

Références

COUTURIER J .—F., NEUVEL S. & DROUIN P. (2006). Applying lexical constraints on morpho—syntactic
patterns for the identiﬁcation of conceptual—relational content in specialized texts. In Proceedings of
LREC 2006, p. 591-594.

