TALN 2011, Montpellier, 27 juin - 1er juillet 2011 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations for 
bioinformatics and Semantic Web 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
Department of Innovations and Business in the Sphere of Informational Technologies 
Faculty of Business Informatics, National Research University “Higher School of Economics” 
Kirpichnaya str. 33, 105679 Moscow, Russia 
vfomichov@hse.ru and vfomichov@gmail.com 
Résumé 
L’article décrit la structure et les applications possibles de la théorie des K-représentations (représentation des 
connaissances) dans la bioinformatique afin de développer un Réseau Sémantique d’une génération nouvelle. La 
théorie des K-répresentations est une théorie originale du développement des analyseurs sémantico–syntactiques 
avec l’utilisation large des moyens formels pour décrire les données d’entrée, intermédiaires et de sortie. Cette 
théorie est décrit dans la monographie de V. Fomichov (Springer, 2010). La première partie de la théorie est un 
modèle formel d’un système qui est composé de dix opérations sur les structures conceptuelles. Ce modèle définit 
une classe nouvelle des langages formels – la classe des SK-langages. Les possibilités larges de construire des 
répresentations sémantiques des discours compliqués en rapport à la biologie sont manifestes. Une approche 
formelle nouvelle de l’élaboration des analysateurs multilinguistiques sémantico-syntactiques est décrite. Cet 
approche a été implémentée sous la forme d'un programme en langage PYTHON. 
Abstract 
The paper describes the structure and possible applications of the theory of K-representations (knowledge 
representations) in bioinformatics and in the development of a Semantic Web of a new generation. It is an 
original theory of designing semantic-syntactic analyzers of natural language (NL) texts with the broad use of 
formal means for representing input, intermediary, and output data. The current version of the theory is set forth 
in a monograph by V. Fomichov (Springer, 2010). The first part of the theory is a formal model describing a 
system consisting of ten operations on conceptual structures. This model defines a new class of formal languages 
– the class of SK-languages. The broad possibilities of constructing semantic representations of complex 
discourses pertaining to biology are shown. A new formal approach to developing multilingual algorithms of 
semantic-syntactic analysis of NL-texts is outlined. This approach is realized by means of a program in the 
language PYTHON. 
 
Mots-clés :   dialogue homme-machine en langage naturel, algorithme de l‟analyse sémantico-syntactique, 
sémantique intégrale formelle, théorie des K-représentations, SK-langues, représentation sémantique, bases de 
données linguistiques, réseau sémantique d’une génération nouvelle, réseau sémantique multilingue, 
bioinformatique 
Keywords:   man-machine natural language dialogue, algorithm of semantic-syntactic analysis, integral formal 
semantics, theory of K-representations, SK-languages, semantic representation, text  meaning representation, 
linguistic database, Semantic Web of a new generation, multilingual Semantic Web, bioinformatics 
 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
1 Introduction 
Many years ago, before the birth of the World Wide Web and bioinformatics, the author of this paper came 
across the following idea : the progress of computers and informational technologies will reach the point when 
the continuation of this progress will require the applied computer systems with the well-developed abilities of 
processing natural language (NL): written texts and spoken speech. The analysis carried out at that time 
distinguished three significant problems : (a) NL-interaction with applied intelligent systems (AIS) ; (b) the 
construction of question-answering systems dealing with free texts ; (c) automatic extraction of information from 
NL-texts for updating knowledge bases of AIS (Fomitchov, 1984; Fomichov, 1992, 1993a). 
An important precondition of solving these problems seemed to be the formal means allowing for representing 
the structured meanings (SMs), or semantic structures, of arbitrary NL-texts pertaining to economy, technology, 
medicine, and other fields of human professional activity. This idea underlay the birth of Integral Formal 
Semantics (IFS) of NL – an original branch of mathematical and computational linguistics (see, in particular, 
(Fomichov, 1992 - 1994) and Chapter 2 of (Fomichov, 2010a)). 
The beginning of the XXIst century appears to be just the time point when the progress of computers and the 
Internet demands powerful and flexible technologies of NL processing for applying them in numerous thematic 
domains. One has been able to observe in the 2000s in different parts of the world the permanent growth of 
interest in designing NL-interfaces  to applied intelligent systems and other kinds of natural language processing 
systems (NLPS), or linguistic processors. In particular, a number of projects being useful for practice is described 
in the publications (Cimiano et al., 2007; Duke, Glover, Davies, 2007; Frank et al., 2007; Popescu, Etzioni, 
Kautz, 2003). 
On the one hand, the first version of a NLPS usually is not an ideal one. Additional work is necessary in order to 
expand the input language of the system (being a sublanguage of NL) and enhance the intelligent capabilities of 
the system. On the other hand, when a useful for practice system has been designed, the proposals  to adapt this 
system to the utilisation in a different domain may be received. That is why it is important to have a collection of 
formal tools enabling the designers to fix the assumptions about semantic structures, linguistic databases, input 
and output data structures, and about intermediate data structures being outputs of some  subsystems and the 
inputs of other subsystems.  
One of the most acute and large-scale problems is to endow the existing Web with the ability of extracting 
information from numerous sources in various natural languages (of cross-language information retrieval) and of 
constructing NL-interfaces to a number of knowledge repositories recently developed under the framework of the 
Semantic Web project (Wilks, Brewster, 2006 ; Fomichov, 2005, 2009a – 2010b). 
As far as in the middle of the 1960s, the researchers had practically the only formal approach to describing 
structured meanings (SMs) of NL-texts : the first-order predicates logic (FOPL). Due to numerous restrictions of 
FOPL, the search for more powerful and flexible formal means for decribing SMs of NL-texts was started in the 
second half of the 1960s. As a result, a number of new theories have been developed, first of all, the Theory of 
Generalized Quantifiers (TGQ), Discourse Representation Theory (DRT), Theory of Semantic Nets (TSN), 
Theory of Conceptual Graphs (TCG), Episodic Logic (EL), and Theory of K-representations. The latter theory 
being now the central component of IFS is an original theory of designing semantic-syntactic analyzers of NL-
texts with the broad use of formal means for representing input, intermediary, and output data. 
In order to understand the principal distinction of the theory of K-representations from other mentioned 
approaches to formalizing semantics of NL, let‟s consider an analogy. Bionics studies the peculiarities of the 
structure and functionning of the living beings in order to discover the new ways of solving certain technical 
problems. Such theories as TGQ, DRT, TSN, TCG, EL and several other theories were elaborated on the way of 
expanding the expressive mechanisms of FOPL. To the contrary, the theory of K-represenations was developed 
as a consequence of analysing the basic expressive mechanisms of NL and putting forward a conjecture about a 
system of partial operations on conceptual structures underpinning these expressive mechanisms. Of course, the 
idea was to develop a formal model of this system being compatible with FOPL. 
This paper aims at attracting the attention of the researchers to new prospects revealed by the theory of K-
representations for the design of semantics-oriented NLPSs (first of all, in the field of bioinformatics) and for 
developing a Semantic Web of a new  generation (SW-2), where its principal distinguished feature will be the 
well-developed mechanisms for conceptual processing of texts and spoken speech in many natural languages. So 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
SW-2 can be also called a Meanings Understanding Web or a Multilingual Semantic Web (Fomichov, 2009a – 
2010b). 
 
The first subject of this paper is the demonstration (on the examples of complex biological discourse and 
definition) of some precious features of a mathematical model introduced in (Fomichov, 2010a) and describing a 
system of 10 partial operations on conceptual structures for building semantic representations (in other terms, 
text – meaning representations) of, most likely, arbitrary sentences and discourses in French, English, German, 
Russian, and other natural languages (texts pertaining to arbitrary spheres of professional activity). This model is 
the kernel of the theory of K-representations. 
 
The second subject is the arguments in favour of employing the theory of K-representations as a foundation of an 
original strategy of transforming the existing Web into a Semantic Web of a new generation. 
 
The third subject of this paper is the description of a new method of designing multilingual semantics-oriented 
NLPS with the help of formal means for representing intermediary, output, and a part of input data. A 
multilingual algorithm of semantic-syntactic analysis of NL-texts called SemSynt1 and introduced in the second 
part of the monograph (Fomichov, 2010a) was developed in accordance with this new approach and was 
implemented by means of the language of Web programming PYTHON. 
 
 
2 Two basic principles of designing linguistic processors 
Most often, semantics-oriented natural language processing systems, or linguistic processors, are complex 
computer systems, their design requires a considerable time, and its cost is rather high. That is why usually, as it 
was mentioned above, it is necessary to elaborate a series of NLPSs, step by step expanding the input 
sublanguage of NL and satisfying the requirements of the end users. On the other hand, the same regularities of 
NL are manifested in the texts pertaining to various thematic domains. 
 
That is why, in order to diminish the total expenses of designing a family of NLPSs by one research centre or 
group during a certain several-year time interval and in order to minimize the duration of designing each 
particular system from this family of NLPSs, it seems to be reasonable to pay more attention to: (a) the search for 
best typical design solutions concerning the key subsystems of NLPSs with the aim to use these solutions in 
different domains of employing NLPSs; (b) the elaboration of formal means for describing  the main data 
structures and principal procedures of algorithms implemented in semantic-syntactic analyzers of NL-texts or in 
the synthesizers of NL-texts. 
 
That is why it appears that the adherence to the following two principles in the  design of semantics-oriented 
NLPSs by one research centre or a group will contribute, in the middle-term perspective, to reducing the total 
cost of designing a family of NLPS  and to minimizing the duration of constructing each particular system from 
this family: 
   
the Principle of  Stability  of the used language of semantic representations in the context of various tasks, 
various domains and various software environments (stability is understood as the employment of a unified 
collection of rules for building the semantic structures as well as domain- and task-specific variable set of 
primitive informational  units);  
 
the Principle of  Succession  of the algorithms of NLPS based on using one or more compatible formal models 
of a linguistic database and unified formal means for representing the intermediate and final results of semantic-
syntactic analysis of natural-language texts in the context of various tasks, various domains and various software 
environments (the succession means that the algorithms implemented in basic subsystems of NLPS are repeatedly 
used by different linguistic processors). 
 
3 Formalization of basic assumptions about primary items of conceptual level 
The monograph (Fomichov, 2010a)  sets forth a current version of the theory of K-representations (knowledge 
representations). It is an original theory of designing multilingual semantic-syntactic analyzers of NL-texts 
(sentences and discourses) with the broad use of formal means for representing input, intermediary, and output 
data. Let’s start to consider the structure of this theory. 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
The first basic constituent of the theory of K-representations is the theory of SK-languages (standard knowledge 
languages). The kernel of the theory of SK-languages is a mathematical model describing a system of such 10 
partial operations on structured  meanings (SMs) of natural language texts (NL-texts) that, using  primitive 
conceptual items as "blocks", we are able to build  SMs of arbitrary NL-texts (including articles, textbooks, etc.) 
and arbitrary pieces of knowledge about the world. The analysis of the scientific literature on artificial 
intelligence theory, mathematical and computational linguistics shows that today the class of SK-languages opens 
the broadest prospects for building semantic representations (SRs) of NL-texts (i.e., for representing meanings of 
NL-texts in a formal way). 
 
The first part of the theory of SK-languages is a mathematical model describing a system of primary conceptual 
units used by an applied intelligent system, in particular, by a NL processing system. This model defines (with 
the help of a rather long sequence of auxiliary steps) a new class of formal objects called conceptual bases (c.b.), 
where each concrete c.b. is constructed for a certain group of application domains. Each c.b. B is equivalent to a 
system of the form (c1, ... , c15) with the components c1,..., c15  being mainly finite or countable sets of symbols 
and distinguished elements of such sets. In particular, c1 = St is a finite set of symbols called sorts and 
designating the most general considered notions (concepts); c5 = X = X(B) is a countable set of strings used as 
elementary blocks for building knowledge modules and semantic representations (SRs) of texts; X is called a 
primary informational universe;  c6 = V is a countable set of variables; c8 = F is a subset of X whose elements are 
called functional symbols. 
The set of sorts St can include, in particular, the elements  spatial.object, physical.object, 
dynamic.physical.object, intelligent.system, organization, moment, situation, event, etc. The set of sorts St is a 
subset of the set X. For instance, X may include the elements book, ship, firm, 12, green, Height, Weight, 
Authors, Part-of, Cheeper, printing, uploading. The elements of the set V are used either as the marks of the 
entities of various kinds or jointly with the universal and existential quantifiers. The set F consists of the 
designations of functions and is a subset of the set X = X(B). The set F may include, for instance, the elements 
Height, Weight, Authors. 
 
4 About a model of a system consisting of ten operations on conceptual structures 
 
Each c.b. B determines three classes of formulas, the first class Ls(B) being considered as the principal one and 
being called the SK-language (standard knowledge language) in the basis B. Its strings (they are called K-
strings) are convenient for building SRs of NL-texts. We'll consider below only the formulas from the first class 
Ls(B). If Expr is an expression in natural language and a K-string Semrepr can be interpreted as a semantic 
representation of Expr, then Semrepr  will be called a K-representation (KR) of the expression Expr. 
For determining for arbitrary c.b. B three classes of formulas, a collection of inference rules P[0], P[1], ... , P[10] 
is defined. The rule P[0] provides an initial stock of formulas from the first class. E.g., there is such c.b. B1 that, 
according to P[0], Ls(B1) includes the elements   car1, green, city1, fin-set, India, 14,  14/cm, all, any, Height, 
Distance, Staff, Suppliers, Quantity, x1, x5. 
For arbitrary c.b. B, let Degr(B) be the union of all Cartesian m-degrees of Ls(B), where m ≥ 1. Then the meaning 
of the rules of constructing well-formed formulas P[1], ..., P[10] can be explained as follows: for each k from 1 to 
10, the rule P[k] determines a partial unary operation Op[k] on the set Degr(B) with the value being an element 
of Ls(B). 
Example. There is a conceptual basis B possessing the following properties. The primary informational universe 
X = X(B) includes the conceptual items prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, nanaphase, telophase describing 
five distinct stages of mitosis (the process of somatic cell division, during which the nucleus also divides) and the 
conceptual items China, India, Sri_Lanka. Hence the value of the partial operation Op[7] (it governs the use of 
logical connectives  - AND and  - OR) on the six-tuple  
< , prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, nanaphase, telophase > 
  is the string  Semexpr1 of the form  
 (prophase  prometaphase   metaphase  nanaphase  telophase), 
and the value on the four-tuple <  , China, India, Sri-Lanka > is the K-string  (China   India  Sri-Lanka). 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
Let X(B) also include the item mitosis and the designation of a binary relation Stages-relation. Then the K-string 
Stages-relation (mitosis, Semexpr1) 
is the result of applying the partial operation P[4] to the operands Stages-relation, mitosis, and Semexpr1. 
Besides, let X(B) include the items article1 (a paper), article2 (a manufactured article), and h1 = article2, h2 = 
Kind1(certn article2, ceramics), h3 = (Country1(certn article2) ≡ (China   India  Sri-Lanka)), h4 = article2 * 
(Kind1, ceramics) (Country1, (China   India  Sri_Lanka)) are the elements of Ls(B). Then the K-string h4 is 
the result of applying the partial operation P[8] to the operands h1, h2, h3. 
Ls(B) includes the string h5 of the form  certn h4, being the result of applying the operation P[1] to the operands 
certn and h4. The item certn denotes the meaning of the expression “a certain”, and the string h5 is interpreted as 
a designation of a manufactured article being a kind of ceramics and produced in China, India, or Sri-Lanka. 
Let h6 be the string of the form (Height(h5) ≡14/cm). Then h6 belongs to Ls(B) and is the result of applying the 
partial operation P[3] to the operands Height(h5) and 14/cm.Thus, the essence of the basic model of the theory of 
SK-languages is as follows: this model determines a partial algebra of the form ( Degr(B), Operations(B) ) , 
where Degr(B) is the carrier of the partial algebra, Operations(B) is the set consisting of the partial unary 
operations Op[1], ..., Op[10] on Degr(B). 
The volume of the complete description in (Fomichov, 2010a) of the mathematical model introducing, in essence, 
the operations Op[1], ..., Op[10] on Degr(B) and, as a consequence, determining the class of SK-languages 
considerably exceeds the volume of this paper. That is why, due to objective reasons, this model can’t be 
included in this paper. 
 
5 Building Semantic Representations of Complex Biomedical Discourses 
 
The theoretical results stated in chapters 1 - 6 of the monograph (Fomichov, 2010a) provide a framework for 
following-up the principle of stability of the used language of semantic representations. According to the 
hypothesis formulated in Chapter 6, the definition of the class of SK-languages enables us to build semantic 
representations of NL-texts in arbitrary application domains.   
 
During several last years, the significance of natural language processing (NLP) technologies for informatics 
dealing with the problems of biology and medicine has been broadly recognized. As a consequence, the term 
BioNLP interpreted as the  abbreviation for Natural Language Processing in Biology and Medicine was born. 
The formalization of natural language semantics is a very acute problem of BioNLP. The attention of many 
researchers in this field is now attracted by the phenomena of the semantics of sentences and discourses (Prince, 
Roche, 2009). That is why let‟s illustrate the new expressive possibilities provided by SK-languages on the 
example of building a semantic representation of a rather complex discourse pertaining to genetics. 
 
It is known that each individual possesses two genes being responsible for a particular characteristic (e.g., the 
height) in case of almost all characteristics (or traits). The genes responsible for the contrasting values of a 
characteristic (for instance, the values “tall” and “short” for the trait “height”) are referred to as allelomorphs, or 
alleles for short. Some genes have more than two allelic forms, i.e. multiple alleles. In the case of the ABO blood 
group system, there are at least four alleles (A1, A2, B and O). An individual can possess any two of these alleles, 
which can be the same or different (AO, A2B, OO, and so on). 
 
With respect to this context, let‟s consider the discourse D1 = “Alleles are carried on homological chromosomes 
and therefore a person transmits only one allele for a certain trait to any particular offspring. For example, if a 
person has the genotype AB, he will transmit to any particular offspring either the A allele or the B allele, but 
never both or neither” (Turnpenny, Ellard, 2005, p. 198). 
 
Let S1 = “Alleles are carried on homological chromosomes”, S2 = “therefore a person transmits only one allele 
for a certain trait to any particular offspring.”, S3 = S1 and S2, S4 = “For example, if a person has the genotype 
AB, he will transmit to any particular offspring either the A allele or the B allele, but never both or neither”. 
 
First of all, we‟ll construct a possible K-representation (KR) of the sentence S1 as the following string Semrepr1: 
 
(Entails((Alleles-relation (certn gene * (Part, certn person : y1) : x1, certn gene * (Part, y1) : x2)  Location(x1, 
x3)  Location(x2, x4)  Semantic-descr((x3  x4), chromosome * (Part, y1))), Homologous(x3, x4)) : P1  
Correspondent-situation(P1, e1)). 
 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
The K-string Semrepr1 illustrates the following new properties of the theory of SK-languages: the possibilities 
(a) to construct the compound designations of the notions and of the objects qualified by these notions, (b) to use 
the logical connective  (AND) for joining not only the semantic representations of the statements but also the 
designations of the objects, as in case of the substring (x3  x4), (c) to associate the mark of a situation with the 
mark  of the meaning of sentence describing this situation, as in case of the substring Correspondent-
situation(P1, e1). 
 
As for the sentence S2, its possible KR will be the string Semrepr2 of the form 
 
(Cause(e1, e2)  Correspondent-situation(P2, e2)  (P2 ≡  y2(person)  y3(person * (Offspring-rel, y2) )  
x5(trait1 * (Possessed-by, y2) )  x6 (gene * (Element, Alleles-function(x5))) Situation(e3, transmission1 * 
(Source1, y2)(Recipient1, y3)(Object-transmitted, x6))  ¬   x7 (gene * (Element, Alleles-function(x5))) 
(Situation(e4, transmission1 * (Source1, y2)(Recipient1, y3)(Object-transmitted, x7))  ¬ (x7 ≡ x6))))). 
 
The symbols  and  in the K-string Semrepr2 are the universal quantifier and of the existential quantifier. We 
can see here that SK-languages allow for restricting the domain of a logical quantifier with the help of the 
expressions like (person * (Offspring-rel, y2)), (trait1 * (Possessed-by, y2)), (gene * (Element, Alleles-
function(x5))), and so on. 
 
At this point of our analysis we have the appropriate building blocks Semrepr1 and Semrepr2 for constructing a 
possible KR of the sentence S3 as the string Semrepr3 of the form  
(Semrepr1  Semrepr2) : P3. 
 
Now let‟s build a K-representation of the final sentence S4 in the context of the sentence S3. We see that the 
word combination “For example” from S4 encodes the reference to the meaning of the sentence S3. The system 
of ten partial operations on conceptual structures proposed by the theory of K-representations contains the 
operation Op[5] to be used just in such cases. This operation allows for constructing the formulas of the kind 
form : var, where the first operand form is a semantic description of an object (in particular, a SR of a statement), 
and var is a variable. 
 
This operation was used for constructing the subformulas certn gene * (Part, certn person : y1) : x1 and certn 
gene * (Part, y1) : x2 of the formula Semrepr1; besides, for building the formula Semrepr 3 from the operands 
(Semrepr1  Semrepr2) and P3. 
 
Now we can use the variable P3 as a mark of the meaning of the sentence S3 in the following K-representation 
Semrepr4 of the sentence S4: 
 
Example(P3, Entails(Situation(e4, posessing1 * (Owner1, arbitr person : y4)(Object1, certn genotype * 
(Designation, „AB‟) : x7), Situation(e5, transmission1 * (Source1, y4)(Recipient1, arbitr person * (Offspring, y4) 
: y5)(Object-transmitted, (certn allele * (Designation, „A”) : x8   certn allele * (Designation, „B”) : x9))  
Situation(e6, ¬ transmission1 * (Source1, y4)(Recipient1,  y5) )(Object-transmitted, (x8  x9)))  Situation(e7, 
¬ transmission1 * (Source1, y4)(Recipient1,  y5) )(Object-transmitted, NIL))))). 
 
Here NIL is the constant reflecting the meaning of the word “nothing”. 
 
Actually, we build a K-representation of the discourse D1 as a string of the form ((Semrepr1   Semrepr2) : P3  
Semrepr4). 
 
To sum up, SK-languages allow for describing semantic structure of the sentences with direct and indirect speech 
and of the discourses with the references to the meanings of phrases and larger parts of a discourse, for 
constructing compound designations of the notions, sets, and sequences.    As far as one can judge on the 
available scientific literature, now only the theory of K-representations explains the regularities of structured 
meanings of, likely, arbitrary sentences and discourses pertaining to biomedicine and other fields of professional 
activity. 
 
6 K-representations of complex biomedical definitions of notions 
 
The analysis shows that the SK-languages possess a number of interrelated expressive mechanisms making them 
a convenient formal tool for building arbitrarily complex definitions of notions. 
 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
Example. Let T1 = “A flock is a large number of birds or mammals (e.g. sheep or goats), usually gathered 
together for a definite purpose, such as feeding, migration, or defence”.  T1 may have the K-representation Expr1 
of the form  
Definition1 (flock, dynamic-group * (Qualitative-composition, (bird   mammal * (Examples,  
(sheep  goal )))), S1,  (Estimation1(Quantity(S1), high)  Goal-of-forming (S1, 
 certain purpose * (Examples, (feeding  migration  defence)) ))). 
 
The analysis of this formula enables us to conclude that it is convenient to use for constructing semantic 
representations (SRs) of NL-texts: (1) the designation of a 5-ary relationship Definition1, (2) compound 
designations of concepts (in this example the expressions  mammal * (Examples, (sheep  goal)) and dynamic-
group * (Qualitative-composition, (bird   mammal * (Examples, (sheep  goal )))) were used), (3) the names of 
functions with the arguments and/or values being sets (in the example, the name of an unary function Quantity 
was used, its value is the quantity of elements in the set being an argument of this function), (4) compound 
designations of intentions, goals; in this example it is the expression certain purpose * (Examples, (feeding  
migration   defence)) .  The structure of the constructed K-representation Expr1  to a considerable extent 
reflects the structure of the definition T1.  
 
7 Related approaches to describing semantic structure of NL-texts 
 
The advantages of the theory of SK-languages in comparison with first-order predicates logic, Discourse 
Representation Theory (DRT) and Episodic Logic (EL)  are, in particular,  the possibilities: (1) to distinguish in a 
formal way objects (physical things, events, etc.) and concepts qualifying these objects; (2) to build compound 
representations of concepts; (3) to distinguish in a formal manner objects and sets of objects, concepts and sets of 
concepts; (4) to build complex representations of sets, sets of sets, etc.; (5) to describe set-theoretical 
relationships; (6) to effectively describe structured meanings (SMs) of discourses with references to the meanings 
of phrases and larger parts of discourses; (7) to describe SMs of sentences with the words "concept", "notion"; 
(8) to describe SMs of sentences where the logical connective "and" or "or" joins not the expressions-assertions 
but designations of things, sets, or concepts; (9) to build complex  designations of objects and sets; (10) to 
consider non-traditional functions with arguments or/and values being sets of objects, of concepts, of texts' 
semantic representations, etc.; (11) to construct formal analogues of the meanings of infinitives with dependent 
words and, as a consequence, to represent proposals, goals, obligations, commitments. 
 
The items (3) - (8), (10), (11) in the list above indicate the principal advantages of the theory of SK-languages in 
comparison with the Theory of Conceptual Graphs (TCG). Besides, the expressive possibilities of the new theory 
are much higher than the possibilities of TCG as concerns the items (1), (2), (9).  
 
The global advantage of the theory of K-representations is that it puts forward a hypothesis about a system of 
partial operations on conceptual structures being sufficient and convenient for constructing semantic 
representations  (or text meaning representations) of sentences and discourses in NL pertaining to arbitrary fields 
of humans‟ professional activity. 
 
 
8 A strategy of developing a Semantic Web of a new generation 
 
It seems that the Principle of Stability  of the used language of semantic representations has much broader sphere 
of application than the professional activity of any concrete research group or research centre dealing with NLP. 
There are reasons to believe that following-up this principle can considerably speed-up the progress of the studies 
bridging a gap between the Semantic Web and NLP. The process of endowing the existing Web with the ability 
of understanding many natural languages is an objective ongoing process (Wilks, Brewster, 2006). It is a 
decentralized process, because the research centres in different countries mainly independently develop the 
translators from particular natural languages to semantic representations (or text meaning representations) and the 
applied computer systems extracting the meanings from texts in particular natural languages or producing 
summaries of the collections of texts in particular languages. 
  
The analysis has shown that there is a way to increase the total successfulness, effectiveness of this global 
decentralized process. In particular, it would be important with respect to the need of cross-language conceptual 
information retrieval and question - answering. The proposed way is a possible new paradigm for the mainly 
decentralized process of endowing the existing Web with the ability of processing many natural languages. 
The principal idea of a new paradigm is as follows. There is a common thing for the various texts in different 
natural languages. This common thing is the fact that the NL-texts have the meanings.  The meanings are 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
associated not only with NL-texts but also with the visual images (stored in multimedia databases) and with the 
pieces of knowledge from the ontologies. 
That is why the great advantages are promised by the realization of the situation when a unified formal 
environment is being used in different projects throughout  the world for reflecting structured meanings of the 
texts in various natural languages, for representing knowledge about application domains, for constructing 
semantic annotations of informational sources and for building high-level conceptual descriptions of visual 
images. 
The analysis of the expressive power of SK-languages (see the chapters 3 – 6 of (Fomichov, 2010a)) shows that 
the SK-languages can be used as a unified formal environment of the kind. It is a direct consequence of the 
following hypothesis put forward by the author in (Fomichov, 2005, 2007, 2010a, 2010b): SK-languages are a 
convenient tool of building semantic representations of arbitrarily complex NL-texts (sentences and discourses) 
pertaining to arbitrary field of professional activity. 
 
This central idea underlies an original strategy of transforming step by step the existing Web into a Semantic 
Web of a new generation, where its principal distinguished feature would be the well-developed ability of NL 
processing; it can be also qualified as a Meanings Understanding Web or as a Multilingual Semantic Web. The 
versions of this strategy are published in (Fomichov, 2009b – 2010b). 
    
9 A new method of designing multilingual semantics-oriented natural language 
processing systems 
 
The theory of K-representations proposes a collection of formal tools being useful for the design of arbitrarily 
complex NLPS. Let‟s consider the basic steps of a new method of designing multilingual semantics-oriented 
NLPS with the help of formal means for representing intermediary, output, and a part of input data. A 
multilingual algorithm of semantic-syntactic analysis of NL-texts called SemSynt1 and introduced in the second 
part of the monograph (Fomichov, 2010a) was developed in accordance with this new approach and was 
implemented by means of the language of Web programming PYTHON. The rationale for using PYTHON can 
be found in (Bird et al., 2009). An explicit description of this approach is given below for the first time. 
9.1 Step 1: formalization of additional assumptions about primary items of conceptual level 
The content of Step 1 is to introduce additional assumptions about some components of the considered 
conceptual basis B. For instance, NL-texts often include the compound designations of the sets. Hence it would 
be reasonable to introduce the following assumptions: (a) the component X = X(B) includes a subset Nat 
consisting of all strings of the form  d[1], ..., d[n], where n ≥ 1, for k = 1,..., n, d[k] is a digit from the set {„0‟, 
„1‟, „2‟, ..., „9‟} ;  (b) the subset F(B) includes the element Quantity interpreted as the name of the function 
«Quantity of the elements of a set » ; (c) the set X(B) includes the elements Quality-composition and Thing-
composition in order to construct, for example, the formulas Quality-composition(S3, container1 * (Weight, 
3/tonna)) and Thing-composition(S4, (c1   c2   c3)), where c1, c2, c3 are the marks of the concrete containers 
with ceramics from India. 
Chapter 5 of the monograph (Fomichov, 2010a) can be used as a good introduction to the ways of fixing the 
additional assumptions about the used system of primary conceptual items. 
9.2 Step 2: selecting the form of text meaning representations 
The expressive power of the class of SK-languages is very high. SK-languages enable us to build semantic 
representations of natural language texts in arbitrary application domains. That is why it is necessary to select 
such collection of the expressive mechanisms of SK-languages that it is useful and convenient to employ these 
expressive mechanisms for constructing semantic (or text meaning) representations of the input NL-texts. It is the 
content of the Step 2 of the proposed method of designing multilingual, semantics-oriented NLPS. 
 
Let's consider the examples illustrating the correspondence between the sentences in English, Russian (in Latin 
transcription), and German and their semantic representations (SR) being the expressions of a certain SK-
language, that is, being the K-representations of the input texts. In these examples, the SR of the input text T will 
be the value of the string variable Semrepr  (Semantic representation). The considered examples illustrate the 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
correspondence between the inputs and outputs of the developed algorithm SemSynt1 , see Chapters 9 and 10 of 
(Fomichov, 2010a). 
 
Example 1.  Let T1eng = "Find a description of the programming language PYTHON on the Web-site 
http://docs.python.org", T1rus = “Naydite opisanie yazyka programmirovaniya PYTHON na veb-sayte 
http://docs.python.org”, T1germ = “Finden eine Beschreibung der Programmiersprache PYTHON auf dem Site  
http://docs.python.org”. Then 
 
Semrepr   =   (Command (#Operator#,  #Executor#,  #now#,  e1)   Target  (e1,  finding1  * (Object-file, 
certn  file1   *  (Inf-content,  certn  description1t   *  (Focus-object,  certn  progr-lang * 
(Name1, “PYTHON” )   :   x3)  :   x2))(Web-source, http://docs.python.org))). 
 
Example 2.  Let T2eng  = "The international scientific conference “DEXA-2009” took place in Linz, Austria, 
during August 31 – September 4, 2009”,  T2rus = “Mezhdunarodnaya nauchnaya konferentsiya “DEXA-2009” 
prokhodila v gorode Linz, Avstriya s 31 avgusta po 4 sentyabrya 2009 goda”, T2germ = “Die internationale 
wissenschaftliche Konferenz “DEXA-2009” war in Linz, Oesterreich waehrend 31. August – 4. September 2009 
stattgefunden”. Suppose that the used basic semantic items are constructed with respect to the spelling of English 
expressions corresponding to these items. For instance, the English words “city” and “town”, the Russian word 
“gorod”, and the German word group  “die Stadt” will be associated with the semantic item city1. From the 
formal standpoint, it means that the elements of the used conceptual basis are built on the basis of English 
expressions. If this condition is satisfied, the algorithm builds the K-representation  
 
Semrepr = Situation(e1, taking-place * (Event1, certn conference1 * (Kind-geogr, international) 
(Kind-focus, science) : x1)(Place1, certn city1 * (Name1, “Linz”)(Belongs-to-country,  certn country1 * 
(Name1, “Austria”) : x3) : x2) (Time-interval, <31.08.2009, 04.09.2009>)) . 
 
Example 3.   Let T3eng = "Did the international scientific conference "DEXA" take place in Hungary?", T3rus = 
“Prokhodila li mezhdunarodnaya nauchnaya konferentsiya “DEXA” v Vengrii?”, T3germ = “War die 
internationale wissenschaftliche Konferenz “DEXA” in Ungarn stattgefunden?”. Then 
 
 Semrepr   =    Question (x1,   (x1  ≡ Truth-value  (Situation  (e1,   taking_place   *  
 (Time,   certn  moment   *  (Earlier,   #now#)  :   t1)  (Event1,   certn  conference   *  (Type1,   international)  
 (Type2,   scientific)   (Name1,   “DEXA”)   :   x2)  (Place,  certn  country1   *  (Name1,   “Hungary”)    :  
x3))))).  
 
Example 4.   Let T4eng = "What English scientist discovered penicillin?", T3rus = “Kakoy angliysky uchony 
otkryl  penicillin?”, T3germ = “Welcher English Wissenschaftler hat  Penizillin entdeckt?”. Then 
 
 Semrepr   =   Question  (x1,  Situation  (e1,  discovering1  *  (Time,  certn  moment   *  
 (Earlier,   #now#)  :   t1)  (Agent1,   certn  scientist * (Country1, England)  :   x1)  
(New-object,  certn  medicine1  *  (Name1,   “penicillin”)   :  x2 ))). 
 
Example 5.   Let T5eng = "What European companies the firm “Rainbow” is cooperating with?", T5rus = “S 
kakimi evropeyskimi kompaniyami sotrudnichaet firma “Rainbow”, T5germ = “Mit welchen europaeischen 
Kompanien die Firma “Rainbow” kooperiert?”. Then 
 Semrepr   =   Question  (S1,   (Qualitative-composition  (S1,   company1  *  (Location,  Europe))    
  Description(arbitrary  company1*  (Element,  S1)   :   y1,  Situation  (e1,   cooperation   *  (Time,   #now#)  
 (Agent2,   certn  company1   *    (Name1, “Rainbow)  :   x1) (Cooper-partner, y1))))). 
 
Example 6.   Let T6 = "Who produces the medicine "Zinnat"?". Then 
 Semrepr   =   Question  (x1,  Situation  (e1,   production1   *  (Time,  #now#)  (Agent2,  x1)  
 (Product2,   certn  medicine1   *  (Name1,   “Zinnat”)   :  x2))).  
 
Example 7.   Let T7eng = "When and where did Dr. Erik Stein arrive to Zuerich from?", T7rus = “Kogda i 
otkuda doktor Erik Stein priekhal v Zurikh?”, T7germ = “Wann und woher hat Dr. Erik Stein nach Zuerich 
gekommen?”. Then 
Semrepr   =   Question  ( (x4    x1), (Situation  (e1,   arrival   *(Time,  certn  moment   *  (Earlier,   #now#)  :   
t1) 
(Start-location,   x1)(Agent1, certn  person  *(Qualif, Ph.D.)(Name,   “Erik”)(Surname, 
“Stein”) :  x2)   (Final-location,   certn  city1  *  (Name1, “Zuerich”)  :  x3) )  (x4 ≡ t1 )). 
 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
Example 8.   Let T8eng = "How many countries did participate in the Olympic Games - 2008?", T7rus = 
“Skolko stran uchastvovalo v Olimpiyskikh Egrakh – 2008”,  T7germ = “Wieviel Laender haben an den 
Olympischen Spielen – 2008 teilgenommen?”. Then  
 Semrepr   =   Question  (x1,   ((x1  ≡ Numb(S1))    Qualitative-composition  (S1,   country1)   
 Description  (certn country1 *  (Element,  S1)   :   y1,   Situation  (e1,  participation1  *  
 (Time,   certn  moment   *  (Earlier,   #now#)  :   t1)   (Agent1,   y1) 
  (Time, 2008/year)(Event1, certn olymp-game : x2)))).   
 
Example 9.   Let T9eng = "How many times did Professor Bill Jones visit  France?”, T7rus = “Skolko raz 
professor Bill Jones posetil Frantsiu”, T7germ = “Wieviel Mal hat Herr Professor Bill Jones Frankreich 
besucht?”. Then 
 Semrepr    =    Question  (x1,   ((x1  ≡   Numb   ( S1))    Qualitative-composition  (S1,   sit)    
 Description  (arbitrary  sit   *  (Element,   S1)   :   e1,   Situation  (e1,  visiting   *  (Time,  certn  moment   *  
 (Earlier,  #now#)  :   t1)   (Agent1,  certn  person  *  (Qualif, professor)(Name,   “Bill”)(Surname,   “Jones”)  :  
x2)  
 (Place2, certn  country   *  (Name1,   “France”)  : x3) )))). 
 
9.3 Step 3 of the new approach: formation of semantic-syntactic components of a linguistic 
database   
 
Chapter 7 of the monograph (Fomichov, 2010a) contains an original, broadly applicable mathematical model of a 
linguistic database (LDB). This model formalizes the structure of a linguistic database allowing for setting up 
various conceptual relations, e.g. 'Verb + Preposition + Noun', 'Verb + Noun', 'Noun1 + Preposition + Noun2', 
'Numeral + Noun', 'Adjective + Noun', 'Noun1 + Noun2', 'Participle + Noun', 'Participle + Preposition + Noun', 
'Interrogative  pronoun + Verb', 'Preposition + Interrogative pronoun + Verb', 'Interrogative Adverb + Verb', 
'Verb + Numerical Value Representation' (a number representation + a unit of measurement representation). The 
model defines a class of formal objects called linguistic bases (l.b.). Each l.b. Lingb is a mathematical 
representation of a morphological datatabase, of some functions corresponding to the subsystems of a 
morphological analyzer, and of semantic-syntactic components of the LDB.  
 
The content of the considered Step 3 is to form several semantic-syntactic components of a LDB. The first 
component Lsdic is the set of finite sequences of the form 
(i, lec, pt, sem, st[1], ..., st[k], comment), 
 
where  i ≥1 is the ordered number of the k+5-tuple (we need it to organize the loops in the algorithms of 
processing NL-texts), and the rest of the components are interpreted in the following way: lec is an element of the 
set of basic lexical units Lecs for the considered morphological basis; pt  is a designation of the part of speech for 
the basic lexical unit lec; the component sem is a string that denotes one of the possible meanings of the basic 
lexical unit lec.  
 
For instance, the verb "to enter" has, in particular, the following two meanings: (1) entering a learning institution 
(in the sense "becoming a student of this learning institution");  (2) entering a space object ("Yves has entered the 
room", etc.). So one system from a possible lexico-semantic dictionary will have, as the beginning, the sequence 
i1, enter, verb, entering1, and the other will have, as the beginning, the sequence i2, enter, verb, entering2. 
 
The component sem can be a complex string being an expression of the SK-language Ls(B) for a certain 
conceptual basis. 
 
Example. If lec = „France‟, then sem can be the K-string certn country * (Name1, „France‟); if lec = „green‟, 
then sem can be the K-string Colour (z, green), where z is a variable denoting an entity with the property “green”. 
 
The number k is the semantic dimension of the considered sort system, that is, k is the maximal number of the 
different "semantic axes" used to describe one entity in the considered application domain. 
 
Example. Let us consider the concepts "a firm" and "a university". We can distinguish three semantic contexts of 
word usage associated with these concepts. Firstly, a firm or a university can develop a tool, a technology etc., so 
the sentences with these words can realize the semantic coordinate "intelligent system". Secondly, we can say: 
"This firm is situated near the metro station "Taganskaya," and then this phrase realizes the semantic coordinate 
"spatial object". Finally, the firms and institutes have the directors. We can say, for example: "The director of 
this firm is Alexander Semenov." This phrase realizes the semantic coordinate "organization".  In the considered 
examples, we'll presume that semantic dimension of the considered sort systems equals is equal to four or three. 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
  
The elements st[1], ..., st[k]  are the different semantic coordinates of the entities characterized by the concept 
sem. For example, if sem = firm, then st[1] = ints (intelligent system), st[2] = space.ob (space object), st[3] = 
org (organization), k =3. The compo-nent  comment is either a natural language description of a meaning 
associated with the concept sem or an empty element nil. 
 
The second semantic-syntactic component of a LDB is called the dictionary of verbal-prepositional frames, it 
contains such templates (in other terms, frames) that enable us to represent the necessary conditions of realizing a 
specific thematic role in the combination “Verbal form + Preposition  + Dependent word group”. An example in 
the subsection 9.4.3 illustrates the structure of such templates. 
 
The third semantic-syntactic component of a LDB is called the dictionary of prepositional frames, it contains the 
templates allowing for representing the necessary conditions of realizing  a specific relation in the combination of 
the form “Noun 1 + Preposition  + Noun 2” or of the form “Noun 1 + Noun 2”. 
 
Example. Let us assume that Expr is the expression "an article by Professor Novikov", and a linguistic database 
includes a template representing the sequence of the form 
  
(k1, 'by', inf.ob, ints, 1, Authors, “a poem by H. Heine'), 
 
were ints  is the sort "intelligent system", 1 is the code of common case in English. We may connect the sorts ints 
and  dyn.phys.ob (dynamic physical object) with the basic lexical unit "professor". We see that the expression 
Expr is compatible with this template having the number k1. 
 
 
9.4 Step 4: development of an algorithm transforming the input texts into their matrix semantic 
– syntactic representations 
 
9.4.1 Step 4-1: Building morphological representation of an input text 
 
Skipping mathematical details, we'll suppose that a  morphological representation (MR) of a text  T  with the 
length  nt  is a two-dimensional array  Rm  with the names of columns  base  and  morph (more exactly, morph is 
the designation of a group of colums),  where the elements of the  array rows are interpreted in the following way. 
Let  nmr  be the number of the rows  in the array  Rm  that was constructed for the text    T, and  k   be the 
number of a row from the array  Rm,  i.e.   1  ≤  k ≤  nmr.   Then  Rm[k,  base]  is the basic lexical unit (the 
lexeme)  corresponding to the word in the position   p  from the text    T. Under the same assumptions,  Rm[k,  
morph]  is a sequence of the collections of the values of morphological characteristics (or features) 
corresponding to the word in the position   p.  
 
Example. Let T1 be the question "Did the management board of the firm “Rainbow” change in May?", and 
T1germ be the same question in German “Hat der Verwaltungsrat der Firma “Rainbow” in Mai veraendernt 
sich?”. Then the morphological representation Rm1 of T1   consists of  the rows (change, md[1]), (management-
board, md[2]), (of, md[3]), (firm, md[4]), (in, md[5]), (May, md[6]), where md[1], ..., md[6] are the sequences 
of the values of morphological properties associated with the corresponding lexical units from T1. Similarly, the 
morphological representation Rm2 of T1germ   consists of  the rows (sich-veraendern, mdg[1]), 
(Verwaltungsrat, mdg[2]), (Firma, mdg[3]), (in, mdg[4]), (Mai, mdg[5]), where mdg[1], ..., mdg[5] are the 
sequences of the values of morphological properties associated with the corresponding lexical units from 
T1germ. 
 
9.4.2 Step 4-2: Building classifying representation of an input text 
 
Classifying representation. From informal point of view, we will say that a classifying 
representation (CR) of the text T coordinated with the morphological representation Rm of the 
text   T is a two-dimensional array  Rc  with the number of the rows   nt  and the column   with 
the indices  unit,   tclass,   subclass,    mcoord,   in which its elements are interpreted in the 
following way. Let  k  be the number of any row in the array  Rc   i.e.  1 ≤  k  ≤  nt.  Then  
Rc[k, unit]  is one of elementary meaningful units of the text     T,  i.e. if  T = t1 ... tnt ,   then 
such position   p,  where  1  ≤  p  ≤  nt,   can be found that  Rc[k, unit] = tp.  If  Rc[k, unit]  is 
a word, then  Rc[k, tclass],   Rc[k, subclass],  Rc[k, mcoord]  are correspondingly a part of 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
speech, a subclass of the part of speech, the sequences of the values of morphological 
properties. If  Rc[k, unit]  is a construct (i.e. a value of a numeric parameter), then  Rc[k, 
tclass]  is the string  constr, Rc[k, subclass]  is the designation of the  subclass of 
informational units corresponding to this construct,  Rc[k, mcoord] = 0.  
 
Example. Let T1 = "Did the management board of the firm “Rainbow” change in May?". Then a classifying 
representation  Rc1  of the text  T1  coordinated with the morphological representation  Rm1  of  T1   may be the 
following array: 
 
unit tclass Subclass  mcoord 
did-change verb verb-in-indic-mood 1 
the management-board noun common-noun 2 
of prep nil 3 
the-firm noun common-noun 4 
“Rainbow” artif-name nil 0 
in prep nil 5 
May noun proper-noun 6 
? marker nil 0 
 
If T1germ =“Hat der Verwaltungsrat der Firma “Rainbow” in Mai veraendernt sich?”, then a classifying 
representation  Rc2  of the text  T1germ  coordinated with the MR  Rm2  of  T1   may have the following form: 
 
unit tclass subclass mcoord 
hat-veraendernt-sich verb verb-in-indic-mood 1 
der-Verwaltungsrat noun common-noun 2 
der-Firma noun common-noun 3 
“Rainbow” artif-name nil 0 
in prep nil 4 
Mai noun proper-noun 5 
? marker nil 0 
 
 
9.4.3 Step 4-3: Building the projections of the  components of a linguistic basis  on the input text 
 
Let  Lingb  be a linguistic basis (see Chapter 7 of (Fomichov, 2010a)), and  Dic  be one of the following 
components of  Lingb:  the lexico-semantic dictionary   Lsdic,  the dictionary of verbal-prepositional semantic-
syntactic frames  Vfr,  the dictionary  of prepositional semantic-syntactic frames  Frp (see Chapter 8 of 
(Fomichov, 2010a)).  Then the projection of the dictionary Dic  on the input text   T  is a two-dimensional array 
whose rows  represent all data from  Dic  linked with the lexical units from  T .  
 
Let's introduce the following denotations: Arls  is  the projection of the lexico-semantic dictionary Lsdic    on the 
input text T; Arvfr  is  the projection of the dictionary of  verbal-prepositional frames  Vfr  on the input text   T ; 
Arfrp  is  the projection of the dictionary of  prepositional frames  Frp  on the input text T.  
 
Example. Let T1 = "Did the management board of the firm “Rainbow” change in May?". Then   the projection of 
the lexico-semantic dictionary  Lsdic  on the input text T1 may be the following two-dimensional array: 
 
ord sem st1 st2 st3 comment 
1 change1 event nil nil Yves has 
changed 700 
franks 
1 change2 event nil nil The city has 
changed very 
much in the 
1990s - 2000s 
2 manag-board org ints phys.ob Management 
board of a 
company 
4 Company1 org ints phys.ob The firm IBM 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
5 “Rainbow” artif-name nil nil nil 
7 May month-value nil nil nil 
 
Here the elements of the column ord are the numbers of the corresponding rows of the classifying representation 
Rc1; the sorts org, ints, phys.ob are interpreted as the designations of the notions “an organization”, “an 
intelligent system”, and “a physical object”. The sorts ints and phys.ob characterize from different standpoints the 
elements (people) of any firms and management boards of the firms. 
 
The verb “to change” has more than two meanings. That is why for real computer applications this array will be a 
subarray of the projection of the lexico-semantic dictionary  Lsdic  on the input text T1. 
 
Example. If T1 = "Did the management board of the firm “Rainbow” change in May?", the projection of the 
dictionary of verbal-prepositional semantic-syntactic frames  Vfr on the input text T1 Arvfr1 may include the 
following subarray Arvfr1fragm: 
 
nb semsit lang fm refl vc trole sprep grc str expl 
1 change1 eng indic nrf actv Money- nil 1 money- ex1 
sum value 
1 change1 eng indic nrf actv Location nil 1 space-ob ex2 
1 change1 eng indic nrf actv Time on 0 moment ex3 
1 change2 eng indic nrf actv Focus- nil 0 phys.ob ex4 
object 
1 change2 eng indic nrf actv Start-time since 0 moment ex5 
1 change2 eng indic nrf actv Time- during 0 moment ex6 
interval 
 
 
Here the elements eng, indic, nrf, actv are interpreted as the values English, indicative-mood, non-reflexive, 
active-voice of the properties language, form-of-verb, reflexivity, voice; the elements Money-sum, Location, 
Time, Focus-object, Start-time, Time-interval are the designations of thematic roles (or conceptual cases); ex1 = 
“(Yves) has changed 700 franks”, ex2 = “(Yves) has changed (700 franks) in the exchange office No. 14”, ex3 = 
“(Yves) has changed (700 franks in the exchange office No. 14) on the 4th of March”, ex4 = “Mary has changed 
(very much since last summer)”; ex5 = “(Mary) has changed (very much) since last summer”; ex6 = “The town 
has changed very much during the 2000s)”. The fragments outside the parentheses are just the fragments where 
the considered thematic role (in other terms, a conceptual case) is realized. The fragments inside the parentheses 
only complement the fragments of the first kind in order to form a sentence. 
 
 
9.4.4 Step 4-4: Constructing matrix semantic-syntactic representation of the input text 
 
Following (Fomichov, 2010a), let's consider a new data structure called  a matrix semantic-syntactic 
representation (MSSR) of a natural language input  text T. This data structure will be used for representing the 
intermediate results of semantic-syntactic analysis on a NL-text. A MSSR of a NL-text T is a string-numerical 
matrix  Matr  with the indices of  columns   or the groups of columns 
 locunit,  nval,  prep,  posdir,  reldir,  mark,  qt,  nattr ,   
it is  used for discovering the conceptual (or  semantic) relations between the meanings of the fragments  of the 
text    T, proceeding from the information about linguistically correct short word combinations. Besides, a MSSR 
of a NL-text allows for selecting one among several possible meanings of an elementary lexical unit. The number 
of the rows of the matrix  Matr  equals to  nt  - the number of the rows in the classifying representation  Rc,  i.e. it 
equals to the number of elementary meaningful text  units in T. 
 
Let's suppose that  k  is the number of arbitrary row from MSSR  Matr.  Then the element  Matr[k, locunit],  i.e. 
the element on the intersection of the row  k  and the column with the index  locunit  is   the least number of a 
row from the array  Arls  (it is the projection of the lexico-semantic dictionary   Lsdic  on the input text T) 
corresponding to the elementary meaningful lexical unit   Rc[k, unit]. It is possible to say that the value  Matr[k, 
locunit]  for the  k-th elementary  meaningful lexical unit  from T is   the coordinate of the entry into the array  
Arls  corresponding to this lexical unit . 
 
The column  nval  of  Matr  is used as follows. If  k  is the ordered number of arbitrary row in  Rc  and  Matr  
corresponding to the elementary meaningful lexical unit, then the initial value of  Matr[k, nval]  is equal to the 
quantity of all rows from  Arls  corresponding to this lexical unit; that is, corresponding to different meanings of 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
this lexical unit. When the construction of  Matr  is finished, the situation is to be different for all lexical units 
with several possible meanings: for each row of  Matr  with the ordered number  k  corresponding to a lexical 
unit,  Matr[k, nval] = 1.  because a certain meaning was selected for each elementary meaningful lexical unit. 
 
For each row of  Matr  with the ordered number  k  associated with a noun or an adjective, the element in the 
column  prep  (preposition) specifies the preposition (possibly, the void, or empty, preposition  nil ) relating to 
the lexical unit corresponding to the  k-th row. 
 
Let's consider the purpose of introducing the column   group 
 
 posdir (posdir1,  posdir2, ...,  posdirn), 
  
 where  n  is a constant between  1 and 10 depending on the program implementation. Let  1 ≤ d ≤ n.    Then we 
will use the designation  Matr[k,  posdir,  d]  for  an element located at the intersection of the  k-th row and the  
d-th column in the group  posdir. If  1 ≤  k ≤  nt,  1 ≤  d ≤ n,  then  Matr[k,  posdir,  d]  =  m,  where  m  is either 
0 or  the ordered number of the  d-th lexical unit  wd   from the input text   T, where  wd  governs the text unit 
with the ordered number  k.  
 
There are no governing lexical units for the verbs in the principal clauses of the sentences, that is why for the row 
with the ordered number  m  associated with a verb,  Matr[m,  posdir,  d] = 0  for any  d  from 1 to  n. Let's agree 
that the nouns govern the adjectives as well as govern the designations of the numbers (e.g. "5 scientific 
articles"), cardinal numerals, and ordinal numerals. The group of the columns  reldir  consists of semantic 
relations whose existence is reflected in the columns     of the group  posdir.  For filling in these columns, the 
templates (or frames) from the arrays  Arls, Arvfr, Arfrp  are to be used; the method can be grasped from the 
analysis of the algorithm BuildMatr1 constructing a matrix semantic-syntactic representation of an input NL-text 
stated in (Fomichov, 2010a). 
 
The column with the index  mark  is to be used for storing the variables denoting the different entities mentioned 
in the input text (including the events indicated by verbs, participles, gerunds, verbal nouns). The column  qt  
(quantity) equals either to 0 or to the designation of the number situated in the text  before a noun and connected 
to a noun. The column  nattr   (number of attributes) equals either to 0 or to the quantity of adjectives related to a 
noun presented by the  k-th row, if we suppose that  Rc[k,  unit]  is a noun. 
 
10 Step 5 of the new method: development of an algorithm of semantic assembly 
 
The content of the Step 5 is to use a matrix semantic-syntactic representation of a NL-text T as an intermediary 
data structure for constructing a semantic representation of T being an expression of a certain SK-language (that 
is, being a K-representation of T). The algorithm of semantic assembly BuildSem1 described in Chapter 10 of 
(Fomichov, 2010a) gives an example of realizing this step of designing a NLPS. 
 
Example. Let T1 be the question "Did the management board of the firm “Rainbow” change in May?", and 
T1germ be the same question in German “Hat der Verwaltungsrat der Firma “Rainbow” in Mai veraendernt 
sich?”. Then it is possible to associate both with T1 and with T1germ the same    K-representation Semrepr of the 
form 
 
Question (x1, (x1 ≡ Truth-value(Situation(e1, change2 * (Focus-object, 
 certn manag-board * (Assoc-company, certn company1 * (Name1, “Rainbow”) : x3) : x2) 
(Time, Last-month(May, current-year)))))) . 
 
11 Conclusions 
 
The theory of K-representations was developed as a tool for dealing with numerous questions of studying 
semantics of arbitrarily complex natural language texts: both sentences and discourses. Grasping the main ideas 
and methods of this theory requires considerably more time than it is necessary for starting to construct the 
formulas of the first-order predicates logic. However, the efforts aimed at studying the foundations of the theory 
of K-representations would be highly rewarded. Independently on an application domain, a designer of a NLPS 
will have a convenient tool for solving various  problems. 
 
A new method of developing the algorithms of semantic-syntactic analysis of NL-texts was described above. The 
method has a number of significant advantages in comparison with other known methods of developing the 
algorithms of the kind. Firstly, the method was used for developing the algorithm SemSynt1 described in 
The prospects revealed by the theory of K-representations 
 
(Fomichov, 2010a). The explicitness and fullness of the description of the algorithm SemSynt1 is many times 
higher than it is typical for the scientific publications on this problem (see, e.g., the paper (Popescu et al., 2003)). 
Secondly, the approach doesn‟t foresee the construction of a pure syntactic representation of the analyzed NL-
text: it is oriented at discovering the semantic relations between the elementary meaningful units of a text.  
 
Thirdly, the algorithm SemSynt1 is multilingual in the following sense. This algorithm allows for using the same 
semantic-syntactic part of a linguistic database for English, German, and Russian languages. The algorithm 
SemSynt1 contains the fragments meaning the calls of language-dependent auxiliary procedures. These 
procedures find several parts of a compound verbal form and join them into one elementary meaningful text unit, 
associate a preposition with a noun, etc. However, the discovery of possible semantic relations between the 
elementary meaningful text units is language-independent, and this promises economic advantages in case when 
the significant information may be obtained from the sources in several natural languages. 
 
It seems that the method stated above together with the algorithm SemSynt1 (as a substantial example of using 
this method) can be used as a framework for designing multilingual semantics-oriented analyzers of NL-texts and 
for obtaining much more detailed documentation of the algorithms as it is usually done. 
 
References 
BIRD S., KLEIN E., LOPER E. (2009). Natural Language Processing with Python. O‟Reily. 
 
CIMIANO P., HAASE P., HEIZMANN J., MANTEL M. (2007). ORAKEL: A portable natural language 
interface to knowledge Bases. Technical report, Institute AIFB, University of Karlsruhe, Germany. 
 
DUKE A., GLOVER T., DAVIES J. (2007). Squirrel: An advanced semantic search and browse facility. In: 
th
Proc. of the 4  European Semantic Web Conference. Innsbruck, Austria. 
 
FOMITCHOV V. (1984). Formal systems for natural language man-machine interaction modeling. In: 
Ponomaryov, V.M. (ed.) Artificial Intelligence. Proc. of the IFAC Symposium, Leningrad, USSR, 4-6 October 
1983 (IFAC Proc. Series, 1984, No. 9). Oxford, UK; New York: Pergamon Press, 203-209. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (1992). Mathematical models of natural-language-processing systems as cybernetic models of 
a new kind. Cybernetica (Belgium), Vol. XXXV, 63-91. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (1993a). Towards a mathematical theory of natural-language communication. Informatica. An 
Intern. J. of Computing and Informatics (Slovenia), Vol.17, 21-34.  
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (1993b).  K-calculuses and K-languages as powerful formal means to design intelligent 
systems processing medical texts. Cybernetica (Belgium), Vol. XXXVI, 161-182. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (1994).   Integral Formal Semantics and the design of legal full-text databases. Cybernetica 
(Belgium), Vol. XXXVII, 145-177. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2005). The Formalization of Designing Natural Language Processing Systems. Moscow: 
MAX Press (in Russian). 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2007).  Mathematical Foundations of Representing the Content of Messages Sent by 
Computer Intelligent Agents. Moscow: State University – Higher School of Economics, Publishing House 
"TEIS" (in Russian). 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2009a) Theory of K-representations as a Source of an Advanced Language Platform for 
Semantic Web of a New Generation. Web Science Overlay J. On-line Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Web Science, Athens, Greece, March 18-20, 2009; available at  
http://journal.webscience.org/221/1/websci09_submission_128.pdf. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2009b). A Scheme and Formal Tools for Transforming the Existing Web into Semantic Web 
of a New Generation. In: Pre-Conference Proceedings of the Focus Symposium  on Knowledge Management 
Systems (August 4, 2009, Focus Symposia Chair: Jens Pohl) in conjunction with InterSymp-2009,  21st 
International Conference on Systems Research, Informatics and Cybernetics, August 3 – 7, 2009,  Baden-Baden, 
Germany), Collaborative Agent Design Research Center, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis 
Obispo, CA, USA, 39-50. 
Vladimir A. Fomichov 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2010a). Semantics-Oriented Natural Language Processing: Mathematical Models and 
Algorithms. New York, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London : Springer. 
 
FOMICHOV V.A. (2010b). Theory of K-representations as a Comprehensive Formal Framework for Developing 
a Multilingual Semantic Web. Informatica. An International Journal of Computing and Informatics (Slovenia), 
Vol. 34, No. 3, 387-396.  
 
FRANK A., KRIEGER H.-U., XU F., USZKOREIT H., CRYSMANN B., JRG B., SCHAEFER U. (2007).  
Question answering from structured knowledge sources. J. of Applied Logic,  5 (1), 20-48. 
 
POPESCU A.-M., ETZIONI O., KAUTZ H. (2003).  Towards a theory of natural language interfaces to 
th
databases. In: Proc. of the 8  International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Miami, FL, 149-157. 
 
PRINCE V., ROCHE M., eds (2009). Information Retrieval in Biomedicine: Natural Language Processing for 
Knowledge Integration. IGI Global. 
 
TURNPENNY P.D., ELLARD S. (2005). Emery‟s Elements of Medical Genetics. Twelfth Edition. Edinburgh, 
London, New York, Oxford, Sydney, Toronto: Elsevier Limited.  
 
WILKS Y., BREWSTER C. (2006). Natural Language Processing as a Foundation of the Semantic Web. 
Foundations and Trends in Web Science, Vol. 1, No. 3. Hanover, MA; Delft:  now Publishers Inc. 
 
 
