TALN 2011, Montpellier, 27 juin – 1er juillet 2011
FreDist : Automatic construction of distributional thesauri for French
Enrique Henestroza Anguiano & Pascal Denis
Alpage, INRIA Paris-Rocquencourt & Université Paris 7
Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex, France
{henestro, pascal.denis}@inria.fr
Résumé. Dans cet article, nous présentons FreDist, un logiciel libre pour la construction automatique de
thésaurus distributionnels à partir de corpus de texte, ainsi qu’une évaluation des différents ressources ainsi pro-
duites. Suivant les travaux de (Lin, 1998) et (Curran, 2004), nous utilisons un corpus journalistique de grande taille
et implémentons différentes options pour : le type de relation contexte lexical, la fonction de poids, et la fonction
de mesure de similarité. Prenant l’EuroWordNet français et le WOLF comme références, notre évaluation révèle,
de manière originale, que c’est l’approche qui combine contextes linéaires (ici, de type bigrammes) et contextes
syntaxiques qui semble fournir le meilleur thésaurus. Enfin, nous espérons que notre logiciel, distribué avec nos
meilleurs thésaurus pour le français, seront utiles à la communauté TAL.
Abstract. In this article we present FreDist, a freely available software package for the automatic construc-
tion of distributional thesauri from text corpora, as well as an evaluation of various distributional similarity metrics
for French. Following from the work of (Lin, 1998) and (Curran, 2004), we use a large corpus of journalistic text
and implement different choices for the type of lexical context relation, the weight function, and the measure func-
tion needed to build a distributional thesaurus. Using the EuroWordNet and WOLF wordnet resources for French
as gold-standard references for our evaluation, we obtain the novel result that combining bigram and syntactic de-
pendency context relations results in higher quality distributional thesauri. In addition, we hope that our software
package and a joint release of our best thesauri for French will be useful to the NLP community.
Mots-clés : thésaurus distributionnel, similarité sémantique, méthodes non supervisées, lexique.
Keywords: distributional thesaurus, semantic similarity, unsupervised methods, lexicon.
1 Introduction
We present FreDist, software that implements methods for the automatic construction of distributional thesauri.
Distributional lexical resources are appealing because they can be constructed automatically from raw text corpora,
and are useful for alleviating data sparseness in many NLP applications (e.g. parsing and coreference resolution).
Moreover, we believe that open software like FreDist can be useful to the NLP community by providing an easy
way to generate distributional thesauri from any text corpus using adjustable settings.
We base our work on that of (Lin, 1998), which uses word context relations to calculate lexical distributional
similarity, and the subsequent work of (Curran, 2004), which distinguishes between weight and measure functions
and evaluates different functions on a semantic similarity task for English. We build on their work by considering
the joint use of different types of context relations, and evaluating distributional similarity metrics for French.
Current lexical resources for French that have been semi-automatically created include the work of (Sagot, 2010)
on the Lefff , a large-coverage morphosyntactic lexicon, and (Sagot & Fi?er, 2008) on the WOLF, a semantic
resource based on the Princeton WordNet. Our work differs by providing a fully automatic approach to the creation
of a lexical resource. Previous work on distributional methods for French includes that of (Bourigault, 2002) on
UPERY, a distributional analysis module that calculates proximities between words and their contexts, and the
work of (Ferret, 2004), which uses distributional similarity to build word senses from a network of lexical co-
occurrences. Our work differs by focusing on the construction and evaluation of distributional thesauri, combining
different types of context relations, and making FreDist and our best distributional thesauri freely-available. 1
1. http://alpage.inria.fr/~henestro/fredist.html
ENRIQUE HENESTROZA ANGUIANO, PASCAL DENIS
véhicule voiture?0.546, camion?0.401, engin?0.301, camionnette?0.291, bus?0.276, fourgon?0.271,
avion?0.269, appareil?0.254, tracteur?0.249, moto?0.248, fourgonnette?0.242, train?0.234,
automobile?0.234, bateau?0.227, scooter?0.225, matériel?0.225, berline?0.224 ...
tragique dramatique?0.331, cruel?0.269, douloureux?0.260, terrible?0.237, triste?0.230, sanglant?0.188,
traumatisant?0.179, fatal?0.174, funeste?0.173, regrettable?0.173, effroyable?0.171, fâcheux?0.162,
spectaculaire?0.160, violent?0.159, étrange?0.159, drôle?0.158, inquiétant?0.155 ...
FIGURE 1 – Distributional thesaurus entries for the noun véhicule and the adjective tragique.
Section 2 explains distributional lexical methods, Section 3 describes FreDist and the construction of our distribu-
tional thesauri, Section 4 evaluates different distributional similarity metrics, and we conclude in Section 5.
2 Distributional methods
The distributional hypothesis states that words occurring in the same contexts tend to have similar meanings,
as posited by (Harris, 1954). We focus on methods that generate distributional thesauri from a large collection
of lexical terms and contexts. An entry in a distributional thesaurus contains, for each lexical term, a list of
neighboring terms ordered by similarity. Example entries are shown in Figure 1.
2.1 Context relations
Basing our terminology on the work of (Lin, 1998) and of (Curran, 2004), we define a context relation as the
tuple (w, r, w?), where w is a primary lexical term (we use lemmas) that occurs in a particular context ; in our
work, contexts consist of a relation r and a secondary lexical term w?. Commonly-used contexts for w include
syntactic dependencies, fixed-size windows (such as bigrams), and bag-of-words representations of documents.
The choice of context dictates the semantic relationship obtained between primary lexical terms : (Agirre et al.,
2009) find that syntactic dependencies and fixed-size windows best capture semantic similarity (synonymy and
hypernymy/hyponymy), while bag-of-words approaches capture broader semantic relatedness (particularly shared
topic). We use syntactic dependencies and linear bigrams, since we are interested in semantic similarity. If a
relation r is bigram, it can take values of either ?1 or +1, indicating that w? appears either before or after w. If r
is syntactic, it can take values of either gov or dep, indicating that w either governs w? or is a dependent of w? : e.g.
the context relation (aboyer, gov, chien). After context relations are extracted from a corpus, each primary lexical
term w can be represented as a frequency vector vw ? Rd, where d is the number of unique contexts appearing in
the corpus, and vwi = freq(w, r, w?), where i corresponds to the context ci = (r, w?).
2.2 Term similarity
Term similarity metrics are used to calculate similarities between pairs of primary lexical terms w1 and w2 using
frequency vectors vw1 and vw2 . (Curran, 2004) breaks term similarity metrics down into two components : a
weight function transforms the raw frequency of each context relation by determining the informativeness of the
context, while a measure function subsequently calculates the similarity between two weighted frequency vectors.
We experiment with the following weight functions for a context relation (w, r, w?) : relative frequency (RELFREQ),
which normalizes the frequency of (w, r, w?) with respect to the frequency of its primary lexical term w ; t-test
(TTEST), where the null hypothesis states that the primary lexical term w and the context (r, w?) are independent,
and the test compares their product distribution to their observed joint distribution ; and the pointwise mutual
information function (PMI), which calculates the mutual information between w and (r, w?).
We experiment with the following measure functions for a pair of primary lexical terms w1 and w2 and their
respective weighted vectors vw1 and vw2 : cosine similarity (COSINE), which measures the cosine of the angle
between vw1 and vw2 ; the Jaccard measure (JACCARD), which compares the number of common contexts to the
number of unique contexts between w1 and w2 ; and the similarity measure that (Lin, 1998) uses (LIN), which is
an information theoretic measure to determine the similarity between w1 and w2.
FREDIST : AUTOMATIC CONSTRUCTION OF DISTRIBUTIONAL THESAURI FOR FRENCH
RELFREQ f(w,r,w
?)
f(w,?,?)
TTEST p(w,r,w
?)?p(?,r,w?)p(w,?,?)√
p(w,r,w?)/f(?,?,?)
PMI log
(
f(w,r,w?)
f(?,r,w?)f(w,?,?)
)
TABLE 1 – Weight functions
COSINE
∑
wgt(w1,?r,?w? )?wgt(w2,?r,?w? )√∑
wgt(w1,?,?)2?
∑
wgt(w2,?,?)2
JACCARD
∑
min(wgt(w1,?r,?w? ),wgt(w2,?r,?w? ))∑
max(wgt(w1,?r,?w? ),wgt(w2,?r,?w? ))
LIN
∑
wgt(w1,?r,?w? )+wgt(w2,?r,?w? )∑
wgt(w1,?,?)+
∑
wgt(w2,?,?)
TABLE 2 – Measure functions
The formulas for the weight and measure functions used in our experiments are listed in Tables 1 and 2. The sym-
bol ? as an argument to a function is shorthand for taking the sum of the function over all possible values for that
argument ; p denotes the probability of a context relation, where p(w, r, w?) is estimated as f(w, r, w?)/f(?, ?, ?) ;
and wgt denotes the application of some weight function to a context relation count.
3 Resource construction
In order to generate distributional thesauri for French, we introduce the FreDist package for the Python program-
ming language. FreDist provides functionality for each step of distributional thesauri construction : (1) Extraction
of context relations from a text corpus in CONLL 2 format ; (2) Weighting of context relations according to a
specified weight function ; (3) Generation of a similarity matrix for primary lexical terms according to a speci-
fied measure function ; (4) Construction of a distributional thesaurus from a similarity matrix. FreDist is highly
flexible, with parameters including : context relation type(s), weight function, measure function, term frequency
thresholding, part-of-speech (POS) restrictions, filtering of numerical terms, etc.
We now discuss the steps we took to build our distributional thesauri for French. We first describe the preproces-
sing used to tag and parse our chosen raw corpus. We then describe the settings we used for FreDist to extract
context relations and perform similarity calculation.
3.1 Corpus preprocessing
We chose to use the freely-available L’Est Républicain corpus, which contains 125 million words of French jour-
nalistic text. The corpus was first preprocessed using simple tokenization and sentence segmentation tools. POS
tagging was then conducted using MElt 3, a freely-available POS tagger for French. Subsequently, we performed
lemmatization and morphological analysis using the previously mentioned Lefff 4 : the Lefff was queried with a
word+POS pair to obtain a corresponding lemma (in case of ambiguity, the first lemma was chosen) as well as a
set of morphological features. The corpus was then parsed with the MaltParser 5, a fast and highly accurate system
for data-driven dependency parsing.
Both MElt and MaltParser were trained on the standard training section of the French Dependency Treebank (FTB)
as described in (Candito et al., 2010), which is based on the original French Treebank with constituent structure
(Abeillé & Barrier, 2004). The FTB contains a total of 12,531 sentences from the Le Monde newspaper, and the
annotation scheme contains 28 unique tags in its POS tagset. On the FTB development set, MElt obtains 97.7%
tagging accuracy and MaltParser obtains 89.3% unlabeled attachment accuracy.
2. http://nextens.uvt.nl/depparse-wiki/DataFormat
3. http://gforge.inria.fr/frs/download.php/26999/melt-0.5.tar.gz
4. http://alpage.inria.fr/~sagot/lefff.html
5. http://www.maltparser.org. We used version 1.3.1, with features including lemma and morphological information.
ENRIQUE HENESTROZA ANGUIANO, PASCAL DENIS
3.2 Context relation extraction
Once the corpus had been automatically annotated with lemmas, POS tags, and syntactic dependency relations
between words, we extracted context relations. Although the base lexical term used in distributional lexical me-
thods is often the inflected form or the lemma, we chose to use a base lexical term consisting of lemma+POS to
distinguish between homonyms (as in dîner+noun vs. dîner+verb) within contexts.
We extracted context relations exclusively for primary lexical terms w that had a POS tag of adjective, adverb,
common noun, or verb, and that appeared at least 100 times in the corpus. A frequency threshold of 100 is
often used in the literature, and is applied because distributional similarity methods are known to suffer degraded
performance for terms that appear infrequently in a corpus (Gorman & Curran, 2006). Secondary lexical terms
w? were also subject to the POS tag restriction, and contexts (r, w?) were subject to the frequency thresholding.
Additionally, lexical terms containing numbers were replaced with a num token. Primary lexical terms above the
frequency threshold totaled 4,126 adjectives, 802 adverbs, 10,997 common nouns, and 3,562 verbs.
Bigram context relations were generated in a straightforward manner. For each token of a primary lexical term w
in the corpus, we placed it in the relation ?1 with the preceding token’s lexical term (or a generic term beg if w
was the first token in a sentence) and in the relation +1 with the subsequent token’s lexical term (or a generic term
end if w was the last token in a sentence). Unique bigram contexts above the frequency threshold totaled 6,680
for adjectives, 3,935 for adverbs, 6,134 for common nouns, and 6,436 for verbs.
Syntactic context relations were extracted in accordance with the FTB annotation style. For each occurrence of
a primary lexical term w in the corpus, we placed it in a relation r with its governing lexical term (or a generic
term root if w rooted a dependency tree), where r is the dependent relation dep. Then for each dependent of w,
we placed w in a relation r with that dependent, where r is the governor relation gov. 6 Some dependencies were
collapsed : for prepositional/coordinating phrases, we chose to fold the preposition/conjunction into r in order
to include both the head of the prepositional/coordinated phrase and the head of the modified/preceding phrase.
Some dependencies were ignored : none involving a punctuation mark was included, due to the underspecification
of punctuation attachment in the FTB. Unique syntactic contexts above the frequency threshold totaled 6,389 for
adjectives, 3,141 for adverbs, 33,881 for common nouns, and 25,624 for verbs.
Note the particularly large number of syntactic contexts extracted for common nouns and verbs. This is perhaps
indicative of participation in rich and varied long-range dependencies for common nouns and verbs, as opposed
to more local dependencies for adjectives and adverbs that can be largely accounted for with bigram contexts.
3.3 Similarity calculation
For each of the four relevant POS categories, we applied weight and measure functions to its collection of context
relations and pairs of primary lexical terms. The resulting thesauri provided the basis for our evaluation. Since we
wanted to test each combination of weight and measure functions, as well as three settings for context relations
(bigram, syntactic, bigram+syntactic), we generated in total 27 test thesauri for each relevant POS category.
4 Evaluation
In order to evaluate our distributional thesauri, we used two wordnets for French as references : the French Euro
WordNet (FREWN) 7, which is manually validated, and the WOLF 8, which is not manually validated. While
the FREWN covers only verbs and common nouns, the WOLF covers all four relevant POS categories. We thus
evaluated verbs and common nouns using FREWN, and adjectives and adverbs using WOLF.
During evaluation, we considered only those primary lexical terms appearing in both the distributional thesauri
and the wordnet reference. This reduction was carried out in order to prevent unnecessary penalization of the
thesauri due to potential incompleteness of the wordnet references. This gave us 3,018 common nouns and 1,426
verbs for the FREWN evaluation, and 374 adjectives and 195 adverbs for the WOLF evaluation.
6. Dependency labels were not used in our evaluation for computational efficiency reasons, but the option is available in FreDist.
7. http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet
8. http://alpage.inria.fr/~sagot/wolf.html
FREDIST : AUTOMATIC CONSTRUCTION OF DISTRIBUTIONAL THESAURI FOR FRENCH
Nouns (FREWN) Verbs (FREWN)
Setting INVR Setting INVR
bigram+syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.282 bigram+syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.345
syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.281 syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.334
bigram, PMI, COSINE 0.273 syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.332
syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.266 syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.330
syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.260 bigram+syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.322
bigram+syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.259 bigram+syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.317
syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.259 syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.312
bigram+syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.259 bigram+syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.308
bigram+syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.259 bigram, PMI, COSINE 0.297
linear, PMI, JACCARD 0.250 syntactic, TTEST, LIN 0.281
Adjectives (WOLF) Adverbs (WOLF)
Setting INVR Setting INVR
bigram+syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.403 bigram+syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.548
syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.397 bigram+syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.522
bigram+syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.373 bigram, PMI, COSINE 0.520
syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.372 bigram+syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.519
bigram, PMI, COSINE 0.348 syntactic, PMI, COSINE 0.517
bigram+syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.342 syntactic, TTEST, COSINE 0.502
bigram, PMI, JACCARD 0.338 bigram, PMI, JACCARD 0.494
syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.330 bigram+syntactic, TTEST, JACCARD 0.491
bigram+syntactic, PMI, LIN 0.319 syntactic, PMI, JACCARD 0.490
bigram+syntactic, TTEST, LIN 0.317 bigram, TTEST, COSINE 0.485
TABLE 3 – Average INVR evaluation scores for the top 10 distributional thesauri (out of 27) by POS category. Each setting
name is a combination of the context relation type (bigram, syntactic, or bigram+syntactic), weight function (RELFREQ,
TTEST, or PMI), and measure function (COSINE, JACCARD, or LIN).
For our evaluation metric, we chose to use average inverse rank (INVR), a standard information retrieval metric.
For each term w, we considered all terms appearing in a synset with w in the wordnet reference to be relevant,
while other terms were considered irrelevant. In the distributional thesaurus to be evaluated, the entry for w
was treated as a ranked list of query results (neighbor terms ranked by descending similarity). The INVR metric
returns the sum, over relevant neighboring terms, of the inverse of that term’s rank in the list. The average INVR
is taken over all terms to be evaluated, providing an evaluation metric for the quality of a distributional thesaurus.
One downside to this evaluation approach is that we ended up evaluating our distributional thesaurus using strict
synonymy, which ignores pairs of words that may be otherwise semantically similar. Due to the scarcity of appro-
priate and/or manually validated resources for evaluating distributional thesauri, we believe that a synset-based
evaluation is nonetheless useful and allows for a comparison of the relative quality of different thesauri settings.
The top five scoring distributional thesauri for each wordnet+POS pairing are shown in Table 3. Our primary
finding is that the combination of bigram+syntactic context relations, PMI weight function, and COSINE measure
function consistently produces the best thesauri across all four POS categories (though the results were not tested
for significance). The finding that PMI and COSINE outperform other combinations is consistent with a recent
comparison of distributional similarity metrics for English (Ferret, 2010), although in that work a TOEFL test was
used for evaluation. A possible explanation for PMI weight function performing best is that RELFREQ does not
weight contexts on the basis of informativeness, and TTEST has the downside of erroneously assuming normal
distributions for the probabilities of particular context relations appearing in a corpus (Church & Mercer, 1993).
COSINE simply appears to work better empirically than the other measure functions. The finding that bigram and
syntactic contexts are most effective when used together is remarkable : to our knowledge, the combination of dif-
ferent types of contexts has not been explored before. A possible explanation is that bigram and syntactic contexts
provide different views of the distribution of lexical terms, resulting in better informed similarity estimates.
Finally, we also looked at the running time of FreDist. We used the best setting (bigram+syntactic contexts, PMI
weight function, and COSINE measure function), starting from a parsed corpus and ending with distributional
thesauri for the four relevant POS categories. When the input contained 1/2 of the L’Est Républicain corpus (62.5
million words) the cpu time was just under 8 hours. For the full corpus (125 million words) the cpu time was just
over 18 hours. Trials were run on a Linux machine with a 2.4GHz processor and 8GB of memory.
ENRIQUE HENESTROZA ANGUIANO, PASCAL DENIS
5 Conclusion
We have presented FreDist, a freely-available software package that implements lexical distributional methods
for the automatic construction of distributional thesauri from text corpora. FreDist is highly customizable and can
be used with any type of text corpus in a number of different languages. Its running time is currently acceptable
for medium-sized corpora of up to a few hundred million words (with the particular settings we used in our
evaluation), but we hope to optimize the code in future versions in order to handle larger corpora of 1 billion
words or more. In addition to the software, we are also releasing distributional thesauri for French that were
created using the best settings from our evaluation.
A second goal of this work was to evaluate distributional methods on French data, and we have obtained results
similar to those of past work on English : our finding that the PMI weight function and COSINE measure function
work best for French mirrors the results of (Ferret, 2010) for English. We also experimented with a novel approach
that involved joint consideration of bigram and syntactic context relations, and found that it works better than either
type of context relation on its own. Given this interesting result, an avenue for future work might be to include
additional context relation types, such as document or paragraph co-occurrence, and determine if they can help
further improve the quality of our distributional thesauri.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Marie Candito for helpful discussions. This work was partially funded by the ANR project
Sequoia ANR-08-EMER-013.
References
ABEILLÉ A. & BARRIER N. (2004). Enriching a french treebank. In Proceedings of LREC ’04, Lisbon, Portugal.
AGIRRE E., ALFONSECA E., HALL K., KRAVALOVA J., PAS¸CA M. & SOROA A. (2009). A study on similarity
and relatedness using distributional and wordnet-based approaches. In Proceedings of NAACL ’09, p. 19–27,
Boulder, Colorado.
BOURIGAULT D. (2002). Upery : un outil d’analyse distributionnelle étendue pour la construction d’ontologies
à partir de corpus. In Actes de TALN ’02, p. 75–84, Nancy, France.
CANDITO M., CRABBÉ B. & DENIS P. (2010). Statistical french dependency parsing : Treebank conversion
and first results. In Proceedings of LREC ’10, Valetta, Malta.
CHURCH K. & MERCER R. (1993). Introduction to the special issue on computational linguistics using large
corpora. Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 1–24.
CURRAN J. (2004). From distributional to semantic similarity. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh.
FERRET O. (2004). Discovering word senses from a network of lexical cooccurrences. In Proceedings of
COLING ’04, p. 1326–1332, Geneva, Switzerland.
FERRET O. (2010). Similarité sémantique et extraction de synonymes à partir de corpus. In Actes de TALN ’10,
Montreal, Quebec.
GORMAN J. & CURRAN J. (2006). Scaling distributional similarity to large corpora. In Proceedings of COLING-
ACL ’06, p. 361–368, Sydney, Australia.
HARRIS Z. (1954). Distributional structure. Word, 10(23), 146–162.
LIN D. (1998). Automatic retrieval and clustering of similar words. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL ’98, p.
768–774, Montreal, Quebec.
SAGOT B. (2010). The lefff, a freely available, accurate and large-coverage lexicon for french. In Proceedings
of LREC ’10, Valetta, Malta.
SAGOT B. & FI?ER D. (2008). Building a free french wordnet from multilingual resources. In Proceedings of
Workshop on OntoLex, p. 14–19, Marrakech, Morocco.
