AN INTERACTION MINING SUITE BASED ON NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING

An Interaction Mining Suite Based On Natural Language
Understanding

Rodolfo Delmonte”, Vincenzo Pallottal, Violeta Seretan3, Lammert Vrielingl, David Walker‘

(1) Interanalytics, Geneva, Switzerland
(2) Department of Language Science, University of Venice, Italy
(3) School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
delmonte@unive.it, <firstname.surname>@internalytics.ch, violeta.seretan@ gmail.com

We introduce InteranalyticsTM Interaction A/lining suite, a collection of tools that performs the analysis,
summarization and visualization of conversational content. Interaction Mining is an emerging Business
Intelligence (BI) application whose main goal is the discovery and automatic extraction of useful
information from human conversational interactions for analytical purposes. Conversations — interactions
that serve specific purposes and whose participants contribute to the achievement of a shared goal — are
ubiquitous in our real and digital life. Especially on the Internet, people interact in natural language using
several technologies such as social networks, instant messaging, VoIP, discussion forum, or (micro)blogs.

Turning conversational data into meaningful information leads to better business decisions through
appropriate visualization and navigation techniques. Interanalyticsm leveraged an advanced Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) technology to a BI tool enabling analysts to understand and generate
insights from conversational content in selected business applications such as Speech Analytics, Social
Media monitoring, and Market Research (Pallotta 2010). In order to achieve this, InteranalyticsTM has
tailored a sophisticated (NLU) technology for mining universal facets of digital conversations (Delmonte et
al. 2009). We will demonstrate the main features of the Interaction Mining suite by showcasing two
business applications:

1. Advanced abstractive summarization for multi-party discussions (e.g. meetings, focus groups,
political debates) that highlights the processes of opinion negotiation and decision-making. The
tool produces high-quality memos and insightful visualization of the participants’ behavior in
terms of their collaborative participation to the discussion (Pallotta et al. 2011).

2. Contact Centers conversations analysis that enables the implementation of novel practical metrics
for contact center quality management. The tool allows quality managers to assess agents’
performance and predict customer-rating outcomes.

More generally, we will discuss how Interanalyticsm technology enables a wider spectrum of Business
Intelligence for unstructured and conversational data. More information about Interanalyticsm can be found

at www.interanalytics.ch.

References

PALLOTTA V., DELMONTE R., BISTROT A. Abstractive Summarization of Voice Communications. In Vetulani Z. (Ed.)
Human Language Technology: challenges for the information society. LNCS n. 6562, Springer Verlag. April, 2011.

PALLOTTA V. Content-based retrieval of distributed multimedia conversational data. In A. Soro, E. Vargiu, G. Arrnano,
G. Paddeu (eds.) Information Retiieval and Mining in Distributed Environments, Springer Verlag series: Studies in
Computational Intelligence, 2011, Volume 324/2011, pp. 183-212, 1st Edition, ISBN: 978-3-642-16088-2.

DELMONTE R., BRISTOT A., VOLTOLINA G., PALLOTTA V. Scaling up a NLU system from text to dialogue understanding.
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural
Language Processing, pages 40-41, Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. Association for Computational Linguistics.

