TALN 2011, Montpellier, 27 juin –1er juillet 2011
The Text+Berg Corpus
An Alpine French-German Parallel Resource
Anne Göhring, Martin Volk
UZH, Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich, Switzerland
lastname@cl.uzh.ch
Résumé. Cet article présente un corpus parallèle français-allemand de plus de 4 millions de mots issu de la numérisation
d’un corpus alpin multilingue. Ce corpus est une précieuse ressource pour de nombreuses études de linguistique comparée et du
patrimoine culturel ainsi que pour le développement d’un système statistique de traduction automatique dans un domaine spécifique.
Nous avons annoté un échantillon de ce corpus parallèle et aligné les structures arborées au niveau des mots, des constituants et des
phrases. Cet “alpine treebank” est le premier corpus arboré parallèle français-allemand de haute qualité (manuellement contrôlé), de
libre accès et dans un domaine et un genre nouveau : le récit d’alpinisme.
Abstract. This article presents a French-German parallel corpus of more than 4 million tokens which we have compiled as
part of the digitization of a large multilingual heritage corpus of alpine texts. This corpus is a valuable resource for cultural heritage
and cross-linguistic studies as well as for the development of domain-specific machine translation systems. We have turned a small
fraction of the parallel corpus into a high-quality parallel treebank with manually checked syntactic annotations and cross-language
word and phrase alignments. This alpine treebank is the first freely available French-German parallel treebank. It complements other
treebanks with texts in a new domain and genre : mountaineering reports.
Mots-clés : corpus alpin français-allemand, structures arborées parallèles, annotation morphosyntaxique du français.
Keywords: French-German alpine corpus, parallel treebank, French morphosyntactic annotation, Text+Berg, e-Humanities.
1 Introduction
Parallel corpora have become central resources for many areas in natural language processing such as word sense disambiguation,
bilingual terminology extraction and machine translation. However most of the large available parallel corpora come from a limited
set of domains (parliamentary proceedings, legal texts). We have compiled a sizable parallel corpus of French-German alpine texts.
It also differs from previous parallel corpora in that it was built on the basis of printed books that we scanned and OCRized.
Our parallel corpus is a by-product of our effort to digitize and annotate all the yearbooks of the Swiss Alpine Club from 1864
until today. Since 1957 the books have been published in parallel language versions in French and German. We have scanned all
books (more than 80,000 pages) until the year 2000. The books from 2001 to 2009 were provided by the Swiss Alpine Club as PDF
documents. Overall, this resulted in a parallel corpus of more than 4 million tokens each in French and German.
We selected a small part of this corpus, 1000 sentences from mountaineering reports, to build a parallel treebank. This treebank
consists of manually checked syntax structures on both the French and German sentences as well as cross-language word and phrase
alignments. There are state-of-the-art automatic tree aligners : the supervised approach reported in (Tiedemann & Kotzé, 2009)
outperforms the unsupervised technique described in (Zhechev, 2009). We decided to build a manually checked, high-quality alpine
treebank to complete our collection.1 These treebanks are useful to train and evaluate automatic tree annotation and alignment.
In this paper we first describe the creation of our Text+Berg corpus. We then focus on the French language parts in the mixed language
period from 1864 to 1956 and the parallel language period from 1957 to 2009. We give an overview of the number of French articles.
But we also look at French sentences scattered throughout the corpus in German articles. This case study of language mixture
illustrates the linguistic richness in our alpine corpus. In the final section we present our steps for building the French-German
parallel treebank, with particular attention to the annotation of the French treebank.
1We have released this treebank as part of our SMULTRON corpus which otherwise consists of parallel treebanks in English, German, Spanish and Swedish for
three other text genres. We are distributing the latest version of our multilingual parallel treebank as SMULTRON v 3.0, Volk et al. (2010c).
GÖHRING, VOLK
2 Overview of the Text+Berg Corpus
The Text+Berg project aims at the collection of a large corpus of alpine texts to study the evolution of language, culture, technology
in this particular domain. We now have digitized the complete series of the yearbooks of the Swiss Alpine Club which contain
articles in French, German, Italian and Romansh, all related to one central theme : mountains. Articles comprise club activities,
mountaineering, travel and scientific reports on different aspects of the alpine world : climatology, geology, fauna, flora, society,
culture, tourism, leisure and sports. There are also collections of bibliographical references, book reviews, and even some poems and
lyrics.
As of March 2011 we have scanned and OCR-converted 196 books from 1864 to 2009, corresponding to nearly 87,000 pages with
a total of 35.75 million tokens representing 5.6 million types.2 The result is a multilingual corpus of 9,917 articles in German, 5,998
in French, 162 in Italian, 17 in Romansh, 4 in Swiss-German and even 1 in English : a typical Swiss product indeed. The majority
of the texts are untranslated, forming thus a multilingual corpus, but almost 15% is truly parallel, i.e. the same articles appear both
in French and German. This parallel subcorpus currently contains 2375 translated articles amounting to 4.7 million tokens in French
and 4.2 million tokens in German.
To create this corpus we had to first collect the books, then we cut them open so that we were able to scan them with automatic paper
feed. In order to reduce the number of OCR errors we merged the output of two OCR systems (Abbyy FineReader 7 and Omnipage
17) by automatically selecting the respective best output, and applied further automatic OCR corrections patterns (cf. (Volk et al.,
2010a)). We manually corrected all tables of content and turned them into tabular format. We finally processed the text, adding
structural metadata, e.g. article boundaries, headers, authors, as well as linguistic information like lemmas and part-of-speech tags.
We have also annotated geographical entities (mountain, cabin and glacier names) which abound in our corpus.3
Many of these steps require different treatment based on the language. We have assigned a language tag to each article (manually)
and each sentence (automatically). We used Lingua-Ident4 to automatically identify the language of each sentence based on character
n-grams. This method is not reliable for short character sequences. Therefore sentences under a certain length threshold inherit the
language assigned to the article they appear in. In this way we distinguish between English, French, German, Italian and Romansh.
In a second step we test for each sentence that was identified as German whether it is written in a Swiss German dialect. This step is
based on a word list with typical Swiss German terms that do not have homographs in standard German.
From the first yearbook in 1864 the corpus contains French articles. This is astonishing as the parallel French language yearbook
“Echo des Alpes”, which was published by the French sections of the Swiss Alpine Club, in turn does not have any German articles.
This French row of publication ceased in 1923 which resulted in a remarkable increase of French articles in the German yearbooks.
From 1957 the yearbooks have been published in parallel French and German versions, though all the articles were translated only
since 1982. The lengths of the articles steadily decreased over time following the typical reading patterns.
average percentage of French articles (sentences) avg article length (tokens)
1864-1923 1925-1956 1957-2009 19th 1950s 21th
6.6% (12.7%) 39.3% (37.4%) 45.7% (48.6%) 5974 2613 1150
While the thematic focus on the mountains has stayed the same over the almost 150 year period, the specific topics have changed. In
the 19th century the mountaineering descriptions had more of a scientific or discovery tone. The mountains were measured and the
routes explored. Over the years mountaineering has turned into a sports activity either for competition or recreation.
2.1 French sentences in German texts
Table 1 shows the language distribution of articles (in rows) and sentences (in columns). For example, the number in column 3
means that our corpus contains 12,392 German sentences within French articles. The numbers are unequally distributed across the
six languages, mirroring the global language tendencies of the corpus.
Let us look at the “foreign” sentences in more detail. German and French articles contain sentences in all identifiable languages, but
only German sentences appear in articles of all other languages. Italian is under-represented with only 162 articles ; furthermore the
2The latest release can be downloaded or accessed online after registration : http://www.textberg.ch/index.php?id=4&lang=en
3For the annotation steps of our pipeline we used Gertwol for the lemmatization (only for German), TreeTagger for the PoS tagging and an own NER module
tailored to the alpine domain (Volk et al., 2010a).
4see Lingua-Ident by Michael Piotrowski : http://search.cpan.org/dist/Lingua-Ident/
FRENCH-GERMAN PARALLEL RESOURCES
numbers of Italian and Romansh sentences in French and German articles are about the same, though Romansh is marginal in our
corpus. The figures for Romansh sentences should be taken with caution as our language identifier sometimes confuses it with other
Romance languages. The particular status of the Swiss-German dialect is somehow (is it due to the special language identification
procedure, the diglossia, or both ?) reflected in the high proportion of German sentences in the 4 Swiss-German articles and the
almost exclusive presence of Swiss-German sentences in German articles (apart from 2 Swiss-German sentences in French articles).
English has been identified 1683 times at sentence level but there is only one complete article in English. English sentences appear
proportionally as often in German as in French articles.
article number of number of sentences
language articles German French Italian Romansh CH-German English total
German 9,917 1,166,141 11,607 1481 1490 799 1035 1,182,553
French 5,988 12,392 670,599 1187 1277 2 607 686,064
Italian 162 329 243 15,048 69 0 1 15,690
Romansh 17 12 3 7 771 0 1 794
CH-German 4 28 0 0 0 143 0 171
English 1 4 0 0 0 0 39 43
Total 16,089 1,178,906 682,452 17,723 3,607 944 1683 1,885,315
62.53% 36.20% 0.94% 0.19% 0.05% 0.09% 100.00%
TAB. 1 – Number of articles and sentences per language in Text+Berg corpus (release 145)
The language statistics reveal the presence of French sentences in articles written (or translated) in German and vice-versa. In the
monolingual as well as in the parallel parts of the corpus, we observe a great mixture of languages, mostly German and French, but
also Italian, English and Romansh. The general challenge we face is how to find the monolingual units that form this multilingual
text landscape.
The source of language mixture are quotations, bibliographical references, direct speech, lyrics, itinerary descriptions and even panel
inscriptions. French quotations are often left untranslated in the German articles. In a German article from 1990, the author cites
the natural scientist de Saussure directly in French : “La vue que l’on a du haut de l’Etna est sans doute plus étendue et plus riante,
mais celle de la chaîne des Alpes, que l’on découvre de la cime du Buet, est peut-être plus étonnante : elle excite dans l’âme une
émotion plus profonde, et donne plus à penser au philosophe”. This particularity of our corpus is certainly due to the presupposed
language skills of the readers : German and Italian speaking Swiss should be able to understand written French. In other words, like
Latin or Greek for classic studies and nowadays English for scientific literature, French is (or was at least supposed to be) intelligible
to all readers of the SAC yearbooks and The Alps. References offer a second type of multilinguality : either the whole article is a
bibliography with entries in different languages or it contains some bibliographical references in the original language(s) they were
published in. For example, the French reference “La contribution de l’Alsace à l’exploration des Alpes” has been identified in the
German “Bibliographie zur Geschichte und Herstellung alpiner Reliefs, besonders in der Schweiz” (1981).
Sometimes our language identifier fails to recognize a French reference although the character sequence is long enough, like the
entry “Baumann, Joseph : Un pionner alsacien de l’alpinisme” from the same German bibliography. Another problematic issue is
the inclusion of a French sentence within a German sentence. In this case, although quotation marks and/or colon may separate
it explicitely from its surrounding German sentence, the French part is not identified and the individual tokens are implicitely
interpreted and PoS tagged as if they were German : “In höhere Regionen führt uns die "Traversée des arêtes des Grandes-Rousses
de l’ Etendard au Pic Bayle" ”.
There are many sources of errors, false positive or false negative examples of language mixture, the main cause being the erroneous
language setting of the article : it produces many follow up errors given that the language of too short a sentence is assigned to it by
default. Similarly, if we fail to identify an article boundary, the whole text up to the next boundary remains under the same language
default. Unfortunately, articles are also sometimes merged with advertising text. The presence of many untranslatable named entities
increase the probability of their original language, misleading the statistical language identification procedure to wrongly identify
a French sentence in German text : “Erwähnt seien etwa Voie des Dames (5b), La pénible (6b), La balade du petit Jules (6b) oder
Tranquille champagne (7b+)”. These errors may bias the interpretation of the multilingual characteristics of our corpus.
GÖHRING, VOLK
3 Our French-German Parallel Alpine Treebank
Text Selection Most treebanks are built on newspaper texts. We are convinced that this monoculture is limiting both the appli-
cability of the treebanks and the linguistic research. In our own treebanking we follow a different approach by diversifying over
text genres and domains. In the Text+Berg corpus the topical dimension is obviously given : the alpine domain. Among the various
text genres contained in the corpus we chose a set of 8 articles from one specific genre : mountaineering reports. We limited the
geographical area of these reports to the Alps to be able to experiment with named entity recognition and geo-tagging (see (Volk
et al., 2010b)). The selected articles appeared in Die Alpen resp. Les Alpes in 1990 and 1991 (see table 2).
The selected articles in French and German do not contain foreign language sentences, except for one short Latin sentence (“Vivant
amici montium !”). The interesting language mixture observed in the corpus is undesired in a parallel treebank. A German sentence
in a French article would most likely result in alignments to “itself” in the parallel German text. In the unlikely case that it has a
corresponding French sentence in the German article, it will still confuse the alignment system.
Year Art. No French title German title
1990 3 Une journée à Üschenen Ein Tag in Üschenen
6 Arête nord du Selbsanft Erlebnis Selbsanft-Nordgrat
13 Souvenirs du Piz Buin et du Piz Platta Erinnerungen — Piz Buin und Piz Platta
17 Deux fois le Rheinwaldhorn Zweimal Rheinwaldhorn
19 Wyss Wändli,chemin des souvenirs Wyss Wändli — Weg der Erinnerungen
1991 2 Aux Piliers du Brouillard In den Pfeilern des Brouillard
4 Une odyssée alpine : la première traversée intégrale des 4000 suisses Eine alpine Odyssee
18 Un regard sur quelques aventures dans la région du Mont Blanc Rückblick auf Abenteuer im Montblanc-Gebiet
TAB. 2 – Articles included in the Alpine Treebank
French Annotation The annotation of our treebanks is a semi-automatic process. We checked and corrected every step manually,
from OCR output to morphosyntactic and functional annotation. Once the language of a sentence is identified, its token sequence
is sent to the TreeTagger5 configured for that particular language. We use the original English, German and Italian parameter files
distributed with the TreeTagger. For French, we created a new parameter file by training the TreeTagger on an adapted version of
the Le Monde corpus. To build the treebanks we loaded the tagged texts into Annotate6, an interactive graphical tool that suggests
constituent phrases and function labels based on a previously computed shallow parsing model (hidden Markov model).7 We built
the first French trees with the help of our adapted Le Monde model. After 200 sentences we generated a new parsing model based on
our own set to avoid the noisy functional annotation of the larger set. We iteratively refined and completed the model by re-generating
it periodically based on a larger set of annotated data.
Why and how did we adapt the French treebank (FTB) guidelines set by Abeillé’s team for the annotation of the Le Monde corpus ?
Our motivations were “to keep it simple” for the tokenization and “not to mix part-of-speech information with syntactic functions”.
Here we briefly discuss some issues in which the SMULTRON French treebanks differ from the FTB treebank. The main differences
are the tokenization of the composed words (mots composés) –these having hyphens, apostrophes or simply spaces– , the simplifica-
tion of the PoS tag and constituent schemes, eliminating the redundancy of some subcategorizations, and the explicit disambiguation
of the function annotation.
At the morphosyntactic annotation level, we distinguish 13 lexical base categories further divided in subcategories resulting in 35
PoS tags in total. We did not want to introduce empty tokens, neither as trace nor as part of an agglutinated word. For example,
the agglutinated preposition au is annotated as the simple preposition à with the PoS tag P, and the definite determiner le is not
extracted. Elisions are explicited through secondary edges. Most expressions containing an apostrophe are split in separate tokens
(c’est → c’ est), a few exceptions registered in a stopword list are kept together (aujourd’hui, prud’homme). Unlike in FTB, the
hyphenated words are not further decomposed and are considered as single words and annotated with a single PoS tag. There are
two exceptions of this rule : clitics and prefixes. Postverbal clitics are split from the verb form ; but if the clitic itself contains an
epenthetical t, then it is not further split (a-t-il→ a -t-il). We simplified the PoS tags for clitics to separate the functional aspect from
the morpho-syntactical annotation, reducing thus the three LeMonde tags to one : CL{sub|obj|ref} → CL. Frequent prefixes (mi-,
ex-, pseudo-) are separated to mitigate the sparse data problem.
5http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/DecisionTreeTagger.html
6http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/annotate.html
7We are aware of the limitations of Annotate, but for our setting there is still no better alternative tool for constituent phrase annotation.
FRENCH-GERMAN PARALLEL RESOURCES
On the syntactic level, we group composed words in additional intermediate or pseudo-constituent categories : CMP_N (sacs de
couchage), CMP_P (à partir de), CMP_D (je ne sais quelle), CMP_ADV (en particulier), etc. We also diverge from the general
rule stated in the FTB guidelines and allow labelled edges between terminal and non-terminal nodes in one case : we annotate the
functions under the verb group node VN. This way we eliminate the merged function labels like A-OBJ/DE-OBJ and keep the
function information of each dependent element explicit.
We do not want to go into detail of the German treebank annotation as we have described this in (Samuelsson & Volk, 2006). Suffice it
to say that we follow the German annotation guidelines of the TIGER treebank which allows crossing branches to represent variable
constituent order and secondary edges for elliptical subjects. In a post-processing step we deepen the otherwise flat syntax trees (in
deviation from TIGER) in order to create more complete and linguistically satisfying syntax trees.
French-German Alignment In order to align the sentences we applied the Bleualign algorithm8 developed by Sennrich on our
parallel corpus. (Sennrich & Volk, 2010) have shown that Bleualign applied on hard-to-align parallel texts outperformed other state-
of-the-art methods. We discarded the many-to-many word alignments and kept the remaining word and sentence alignments. An
annotator added the phrase alignments and completed resp. corrected the previously aligned sentences and words using TreeAligner9,
an open-source tool developed in-house to create, maintain and query parallel treebanks. Though the automatic alignment suggestions
helped to speed up the manual process, the alignment was harder than expected due to the relative freedom of the translated texts.
Such translation characteristics are a critical issue to consider while building a parallel treebank. Our experience shows that an
average of 3-5 minutes is spent for annotating a sentence and the same amount of time for aligning a pair of corresponding trees.
sentences tokens aligned sentences phrases words nodes (mixed)
FR 1075 22,085 1071 5327 11,801
DE 1060 19,467 1055 4965 10,959
FR-DE pairs 1115 4995 12,016 17,488 (477)
TAB. 3 – Size of the Alpine treebank
Figure 1 contains an aligned tree pair. Node labels denote syntactic constituents like noun phrase (NP), adjective phrase (AP), and
prepositional phrase (PP). Edge labels denote syntactic functions like subject (SUJ in French, SB in German), conjunct (CJ), or
accusative object (OA in German). Green lines between the trees represent a close translation equivalences whereas red lines stand
for approximate translation equivalences. The distinction between close and approximate equivalence is not always clear-cut, and
we have compiled annotation guidelines with many examples to guide our annotators. We always take the perspective that aligned
units should be reusable in a machine translation system outside of the given sentence context.
An issue to reconsider in future development is the French annotation of certain syntax structures, e.g. coordinations, that impede a
maximal alignment with other language. It is impossible to align the first conjuncts, only the last element of the French coordination
can be aligned to its German counterpart. The alignment of nominal phrases and also adjective phrases remains “incomplete”, the
parallelism potential is not fully exploited.
Parallel treebanks allow precise queries over aligned syntax structures. For example, it is possible to query for French relative clauses
which have aligned German noun phrases. Our query tool supports the full range of treebank queries combined with alignment
constraints. Treebank queries comprise dominance relations (e.g. category X dominates part-of-speech Y), precedence relations (e.g.
word X precedes part-of-speech Y), tree predicates (e.g. category X has 5 daughters) and any combinations thereof. Such queries
can be formulated over both trees in a bilingual tree pair and may then be refined with alignment constraints. This allows searches
for and insights into translation correspondences that were hitherto impossible.
4 Conclusion
We have presented our multilingual and partly parallel corpus of alpine texts. This corpus contains a large number of articles in French
and German and is thus a welcome addition to parallel corpora for different applications in language technology. We currently use it
to investigate how to best combine corpora for domain-specific SMT.
8http://github.com/rsennrich/bleualign
9http://www.cl.uzh.ch/kitt/treealigner
GÖHRING, VOLK
Text+Berg is an ongoing project in which we constantly refine the corpus by removing OCR errors and adding more layers of
annotation. We also plan to increase the corpus size. To this end we are currently processing the Echo des Alpes, the yearbooks 1872-
1923 of the French section of the Swiss Alpine Club. Not only will the corpus grow but this additional subcorpus will also balance
the German majority with a new French counterpart : 6.5 million tokens from 5900 articles. And neither last nor least, we will give
stronger support to English in our corpus by including texts from the British Alpine Club. As a next step we plan to automatically
build a large parallel treebank on the parallel part of the Text+Berg corpus following (Sennrich & Volk, 2010), (Zhechev, 2009) and
(Tiedemann & Kotzé, 2009). On the other hand, we continue to manually annotate and align new treebanks covering other domains
and genres.
SENT
A-OBJ SUJ
PP
NP
AP
COORD
AP
PP COORD
NP NP NP
AP AP VN AP
A un endroit raide et muni de petites prises acérées , puis un toit impressionnant , succède le passage décisif .
P D_ind N_C A_qual C_C A_qual P A_qual N_C A_qual PCT_W C_C D_ind N_C A_qual PCT_W V D_def N_C A_qual PCT_S
APPR ART ADJA $, APPR ADJA ADJA NN ADJA NN KON ART ADJD ADJA NN VVFIN ART NN $, APPR PRELS PRF PIS VVFIN $.
Nach einer steilen , mit messerscharfen kleinen Griffen bestückten Passage und einem eindrücklich ausladenden Dach folgt die Stelle , an der sich alles entscheidet .
HD HD HD MO HD NK HD HD
AP AP AP AP NP NP NP
NK NK HD NK NK HD HD NK
NP NP PP
HD NK MO OA SB HD
PP S
MO HD NK HD RC
AP NP
NK NK NK HD
NP
CJ CD CJ
CNP
HD NK
PP
MO HD SB
S
FIG. 1 – Aligned parallel French-German trees
Références
ABEILLÉ A., CLÉMENT L. & TOUSSENEL F. (2003). Treebanks. Building and Using Parsed Corpora, chapter 13 : Building a
treebank for French, p. 165–188. Text, Speech and Language Technology. Kluwer Academic Publishers : Dordrecht.
SAMUELSSON Y. & VOLK M. (2006). Phrase alignment in parallel treebanks. In 5th Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories.
SENNRICH R. & VOLK M. (2010). MT-based sentence alignment for OCR-generated parallel texts. In Proceedings of AMTA,
Denver.
TIEDEMANN J. & KOTZÉ G. (2009). Building a large machine-aligned parallel treebank. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, p. 197–208, Milano.
VOLK M., BUBENHOFER N., ALTHAUS A., BANGERTER M., FURRER L. & RUEF B. (2010a). Challenges in building a mul-
tilingual alpine heritage corpus. In N. CALZOLARI, K. CHOUKRI, B. MAEGAARD, J. MARIANI, J. ODIJK, S. PIPERIDIS,
M. ROSNER & D. TAPIAS, Eds., Proceedings of the Seventh conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta : European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
VOLK M., GÖHRING A. & MAREK T. (2010b). Combining parallel treebanks and geo-tagging. In Fourth Linguistic Annotation
Workshop (LAW IV).
VOLK M., GÖHRING A., MAREK T. & SAMUELSSON Y. (2010c). SMULTRON (version 3.0) — The Stockholm MULtilin-
gual parallel TReebank. http ://www.cl.uzh.ch/research/paralleltreebanks_en.html. An English-French-German-Spanish-Swedish
parallel treebank with sub-sentential alignments.
ZHECHEV V. (2009). Automatic Generation of Parallel Treebanks. An Efficient Unsupervised System. PhD thesis, School of
Computing at Dublin City University.
