TALN 2007, Toulouse, 5–8 juin 2007
Collocation translation based on sentence alignment
and parsing
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
Language Technology Laboratory (LATL) - University of Geneva,
2 Rue de Candolle, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
{Violeta.Seretan,Eric.Wehrli}@lettres.unige.ch
Résumé. Bien que de nombreux efforts aient été déployés pour extraire des collocations
à partir de corpus de textes, seule une minorité de travaux se préoccupent aussi de rendre le
résultat de l’extraction prêt à être utilisé dans les applications TAL qui pourraient en bénéficier,
telles que la traduction automatique. Cet article décrit une méthode précise d’identification de
la traduction des collocations dans un corpus parallèle, qui présente les avantages suivants :
elle peut traiter des collocation flexibles (et pas seulement figées) ; elle a besoin de ressources
limitées et d’un pouvoir de calcul raisonnable (pas d’alignement complet, pas d’entraînement) ;
elle peut être appliquée à plusieurs paires des langues et fonctionne même en l’absence de dic-
tionnaires bilingues. La méthode est basée sur l’information syntaxique provenant du parseur
multilingue Fips. L’évaluation effectuée sur 4000 collocations de type verbe-objet correspon-
dant à plusieurs paires de langues a montré une précision moyenne de 89.8% et une couverture
satisfaisante (70.9%). Ces résultats sont supérieurs à ceux enregistrés dans l’évaluation d’autres
méthodes de traduction de collocations.
Abstract. To date, substantial efforts have been devoted to the extraction of collocations
from text corpora. However, only a few works deal with the subsequent processing of results
in order for these to be successfully integrated into the NLP applications that could benefit
from them (e.g., machine translation). This paper presents an accurate method for identifying
translation equivalents of collocations in parallel text, whose main strengths are that : it can
handle flexible (not only rigid) collocations ; it only requires limited resources and computa-
tion (no full alignment, no training needed) ; it deals with several language pairs, and it can
even work when no bilingual dictionary is available. The method relies heavily on syntactic in-
formation provided by the Fips multilingual parser. Evaluation performed on 4000 verb-object
collocations for different language pairs showed an average accuracy of 89.8% and a reasonable
coverage (70.9%). These figures are higher that those reported in the evaluation of related work
in collocation translation.
Mots-clés : traduction de collocations, extraction de collocations, parsing, alignement
de textes.
Keywords: collocation translation, collocation extraction, parsing, text alignment.
401
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
1 Introduction
Collocations constitute a subclass of phraseological units (ormulti-word expressions) that recei-
ved particular attention in several research fields—e.g., second language learning, lexicography
and natural language processing—both because of their massive presence in language and be-
cause of their specific features : although they look similar to regular constructions, they are
unpredictable for non-native speakers and usually do not have a literal translation. Consider,
for instance, the collocation to break a record. A non-native speaker of English would hardly
choose break as the support verb for the noun record. Moreover, this collocation does not trans-
late in a word-for-word fashion into French (*casser un record), but as battre un record (lit., to
beat a record).
For several decades already, sustained efforts have been put into developing methods for the
automatic extraction of collocations from text corpora, as well as into the evaluation of extrac-
tion results ; see (Seretan & Wehrli, 2006) for a thorough review. Considerably less work deals
instead with the post-processing of extracted collocations and with their further integration into
other NLP applications, like machine translation, natural language generation, parsing, word
sense disambiguation, or text classification. Among the few exceptions, we can mention works
dealing with the semantic classification of collocations (Wanner et al., 2006), the extraction of
synonymous collocations (Wu & Zhou, 2003), the translation of collocations (Smadja et al.,
1996; Lü & Zhou, 2004), or the use of collocations in machine translation (Orliac & Dillinger,
2003), in natural language generation (Heid & Raab, 1989), and in text classification (Williams,
2002). Unfortunately, these efforts remained generally isolated and at an early stage of develop-
ment, despite the largely acknowledged critical role played by such expressions in many NLP
tasks (Sag et al., 2002) and the continuous improvement of extraction techniques.
This paper describes a method for obtaining collocation equivalents from sentence-aligned texts
that is based on the parsing of source and target sentences. The main advantages of this method
are that it can deal with flexible (as opposed to rigid) collocations ; it does not require an exten-
sive computation or huge training resources ; and it does not rely crucially on the availability of
bilingual dictionaries.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of previous work on collocation
translation. Section 3 introduces our method and briefly describes the processing modules on
which it relies (the multilingual parser, the collocation extractor, and the sentence aligner). Ex-
perimental results, an evaluation of the method and the error analysis are presented in section 4.
Section 5 concludes the paper by discussing the relative merits of the newly introduced method
with respect to existing methods, and by pointing out the ways in which this method can be
improved in order to attain better performance.
2 Previous Collocation Translation Work
Corpus-based collocation translation has previously been dealt with in a number of works. One
of the earliest is (Kupiec, 1993), that identifies noun phrase correspondences between English
and French from Hansard parallel corpus. Both source and target corpora are POS-tagged, then
NPs are detected with a finite-state recognizer. For mapping correspondences, the author uses
Expectation Maximization (EM), an iterative re-estimation algorithm. The method was evalua-
ted on a small set of 100 NPs, and achieved 90% accuracy. Also, Van der Eijk (1993) performed
402
Collocation translation based on sentence alignment and parsing
a similar experiment for Dutch to English, but the reported accuracy was lower, since the eva-
luation was performed on a larger test set. This method differs from (Kupiec, 1993) in that it
uses relative frequencies for computing the mappings between source and target terms.
Pursuing the same goal, Dagan and Church (1994) use a word aligner to propose (multiple)
candidate translations for rigid noun phrases. Unlike the previous approaches, their system,
TERMIGHT, has the advantage of being able to find translations even for infrequent terms. But
like the preceding systems, it deals with rigid constructions only.
Later, the first proper collocation translation system, Champollion, has been implemented by
Smadja et al. (1996). It relies on Xtract (Smadja, 1993) for detecting source collocations in En-
glish, then it applies a statistical correlation metric, namely the Dice coefficient, for identifying
their translation equivalents in the aligned French sentences in Hansard corpus. Noticeably, this
system can also deal with flexible collocations (e.g., verbal phrases). It requires an additional
post-processing step in which the order of words in a flexible collocation is decided, as no syn-
tactic information is available. The system has been evaluated by three human annotators, and
showed a precision of 77% and, respectively, 61% on two different test sets of 300 collocations
each.
Finally, the work of Lü and Zhou (2004) can deal with flexible collocations as well ; moreo-
ver, these are validated syntactic constituents, since extracted with a dependency parser. The
syntactic types considered are verb-object, adjective-noun, and adverb-verb. Collocations are
extracted from monolingual corpora in English and Chinese by applying the log-likelihood ra-
tios statistical test on the dependency pairs identified. The translation is then performed with
a statistical translation model that estimates word translations with EM. The head and the de-
pendent word are assigned uneven probabilities, while the dependency relation is considered
to be preserved across languages. The method (whose reported coverage is 83.98%) has been
evaluated on a test set of 1000 randomly selected collocations. It achieved between 50.85% and
68.15% accuracy, depending on the syntactic type.
3 Translating Collocations Using Parsing Information
3.1 The method
The translation procedure we developed involves a series of steps relying on other processing
modules, shortly described below. The procedure assumes that a parallel corpus is available,
and that both the source and target languages are supported by the parser. First, collocations
are extracted from the source corpus by using a hybrid extraction procedure (section 3.3) that
combines a standard statistical technique with the deep syntactic analysis performed with the
Fips parser (section 3.2). In the next step, for each collocation pair extracted, a limited number
of sentence contexts is selected amongst all its contexts of occurrence in the source corpus ; in
our present experiments, we considered a maximum of 50 contexts for each collocation.
The source sentences are then aligned using a sentence-aligner (section 3.4) and the equivalent
target sentences are gathered into a small corpus specific to each source collocation. As the
whole translation procedure is automatic, no manual validation is performed on the resulting
sentence alignments. The corpus of target sentences is subsequently processed with Fips, and
candidate collocation pairs are extracted using the same method as in the case of source collo-
403
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
cations. Finally, to find out the translation of the source collocation given these candidate pairs,
we apply a matching procedure, which is described in section 3.5.
3.2 The Fips parser
Fips is a deep symbolic parser based on generative grammar concepts that was developed at
LATL over the last decade (Wehrli, 2006). It is written in Component Pascal and adopts an
object-oriented implementation design allowing to couple language-specific processing with
a generic core module. The parsing algorithm proceeds in a bottom-up fashion, by applying
(general or language-specific) licensing rules, by treating alternatives in parallel, and by using
pruning heuristics. The parser currently supports the following languages: English, French, Spa-
nish, Italian, German (other languages are under development as well).
In Fips, each syntactic constituent is represented as a simplified X-bar structure of the form
[XP L X R] with no intermediate level, where X is a variable ranging over the set of lexical
categories1. L and R stand for (possibly empty) lists of, respectively, left and right subconsti-
tuents. The lexical level contains detailed morphosyntactic and semantic information available
from the manually-built lexicons. In the structures returned by the parser, extraposed elements
(interrogative phrases, relative pronouns, clitics, etc.) are coindexed with empty constituents in
canonical positions (i.e., typical argument or adjunct positions).
3.3 Collocation extraction with Fips
The first step in the collocation extraction process is the identification of collocation candidates.
Once a sentence has been parsed by Fips, the resulting structure is checked for potential collo-
cational pairs, by recursively examining all the pairs consisting of the head of a phrase and an
element of one of its left or right subconstituents. Those pairs that satisfy certain constraints are
retained as valid collocation candidates. The constraints may refer both to the lexical items indi-
vidually, and to the combination as a whole. For instance, proper nouns and auxiliary verbs are
ruled out, and combinations are considered valid if in a configuration like the following2: A-N:
wide range, N-A: work concerned, N-N: food chain, N(subject)-V: rule applies, V-N(object):
strike balance, V-P: reflect upon, V-P-N(argument or adjunct): comply with rule, N-P-N: fight
against terrorism, V-A: steer clear, V-Adv: desperately need, Adv-A: highly controversial, A-
P: favourable to, coordinated A-A: nice and warm, coordinated N-N: part and parcel. It is
worth noting that each lexical item may in turn be a complex lexeme (e.g., a compound or a
collocation), like death penalty in abolish the death penalty ; such a lexeme can be recognized
as a single lexical item by Fips, if is is present in its lexicon.
In the second extraction step, the candidate pairs that have been identified in step one are parti-
tioned into syntactically-homogeneous classes, then log-likelihood ratios test (Dunning, 1993)
is applied on each class. Log-likelihood ratios (LLR) is a statistical hypothesis test that can
be used to identify statistically-significant pairs among candidates (i.e., collocations) based on
lexical co-occurrence evidence organized in a so-called contingency table, for each two lexical
items making up a candidate pair. This table lists, essentially, the joint frequency of the two
1The lexical categories are N(oun), Adj(ective), V(erb), P(reposition), Adv(erb), C(onjonction), Inter(jection),
to which we add the two functional categories T(ense) and F(unctional).
2The list of configurations is not exhaustive. It is, in fact, growing as more corpus evidence is considered.
404
Collocation translation based on sentence alignment and parsing
items, the marginal frequency of each item, and the total number of pairs in the correspon-
ding class. The result of extraction is represented by the initial list of candidate pairs ranked
according to the LLR score ; the higher the score, the more likely that the pair constitutes a
collocation. More details about the extraction procedure can be found in (Nerima et al., 2003).
3.4 Sentence alignment
Given a parallel corpus, a sentence alignment tool finds, for each source sentence, the corres-
ponding sentence in the target corpus (i.e., the translation equivalent of that sentence, or the
target sentence). State-of-the-art sentence aligners are based on the char-length of words in sen-
tences, on lexical clues (e.g., numbers, cognate words) and possibly exploit the macro-structure
of documents (titles, sections, paragraphs)3.
We employed our own sentence-aligner based on lexical clues and on context-size matching
for paragraph detection, followed by a one-by-one sentence alignment within the aligned pa-
ragraphs. The method, which is fully described in (Nerima et al., 2003), has the advantage of
computing a partial, on-the-fly sentence alignment for a given source sentence identified by the
file position of a word inside that sentence. This aligner is best suited for our purpose, as it
allows the rapid identification of the target sentence given an item of the source collocation,
without us being forced to align the whole source and target documents. Although the aligner’s
accuracy is not perfect (between 88% and 93.5%), the translation results obtained with our
procedure suggest that it is nonetheless satisfactory for this specific task.
3.5 The matching procedure
To actually translate a collocation, we try to match it against the collocation candidates ex-
tracted from the associated target sentences. Like in (Lü & Zhou, 2004), we assume that the
mapping between the source collocation and the target collocation preserves the syntactical re-
lation involved, meaning, for instance, that a verb-object collocation in French translates into a
verb-object collocation in English4. Therefore, we first perform a syntactic filter on the target
candidate pairs that retains only the appropriate pairs, i.e., those that involve the same syntactic
relation as the source collocation.
We then (optionally) apply a ‘semantic’ filter as follows: first, we derive from the syntactic type
information about the semantic head of a collocation (usually called base). For instance, the
base of a verb-object collocation is the object, that of an N-A collocation is the noun N, etc.
Collocations are known to preserve the translation of the base, while the translation of collocate
can vary across languages. For instance, in translating break a record into French, the noun
record is preserved, while the verbal collocate break (casser) is transformed into battre. Whe-
never translation information for the base of the source collocation is available in our bilingual
dictionaries, we consider all its possible translations and we apply a filter on the target candidate
pairs accordingly ; otherwise, this filter is skipped. Finally, we select as target collocation (i.e.,
as translation of the source collocation) the most frequent pair among the remaining pairs, after
the filters described above have been applied.
3Lack of space prevents us from providing more details here.
4This is obviously not always the case. Yet, this (simplifying) assumption was shown by Lü and Zhou (2004)
to hold in the majority of cases.
405
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
4 Results and Evaluation
4.1 Translation experiment
The translation experiment described in this paper was performed on collocations extracted
from a parallel corpus in four languages (English, French, Italian and Spanish), which is a sub-
part of Europarl parallel corpus of European Parliament proceedings (Koehn, 2005). It contains
62 files in each of the four languages that correspond to the complete proceedings for the year
2001. Table 1 displays several statistics on the corpus (rows 1–4) and on the collocations ex-
tracted with the method presented in section 3.3 (rows 5–6).
Row Statistics English French Italian Spanish
1 Size (MB) 21.4 23.7 22.9 22.7
2 Tokens 4158622 4770835 4134549 4307360
3 Sentences 161802 162671 160906 172121
4 Average sentence length (tokens) 25.7 29.3 25.7 25
5 Total collocation pairs extracted 851500 988918 880608 901224
6 Distinct collocation pairs extracted 333428 327366 333848 315532
7 V-O pairs in translation set (500 distinct) 28005 27058 25787 23003
8 Frequency range for pairs in translation set 5–852 6–784 7–1085 6–480
TAB. 1 – Experimental statistics: corpus size, collocations extracted, translation sets size.
From the whole set of collocations extracted, we have chosen for our translation experiment
the top 500 verb-object collocations obtained in each language. These 500 collocation types
correspond to many more instances occurring in the corpus ; row 7 of Table 1 displays the
total number of instances in each translation set, and row 8 shows the frequency range for the
collocation types in each set.
The translation method described in section 3 has been applied on these translation sets in each
of the possible directions. Therefore, for the 4 languages considered, there are 12 language pairs
on which the method was applied. Several (randomly chosen) translations obtained are listed in
Table 2.
4.2 Evaluation of results and error analysis
The random examples of translations shown in Table 2 suggest that the accuracy of our method
is quite high. In fact, the evaluation performed until now shows that surprisingly good results
can be achieved with this rather simple method.
The results obtained for a couple of language pairs in the translation experiment presented
here have been thoroughly checked by a human judge. Whenever necessary, the contexts of
the source collocation in the original documents have been inspected and confronted against
the target sentences with the help of a concordancer connected to our collocation extractor and
sentence aligner (Seretan et al., 2004). The accuracy results for the language pairs evaluated
until now are shown in the second column of Table 3. As it can be seen, comparable accuracy
is achieved for the language pairs for which a bilingual (mono-lexeme) dictionary is available
(90.9% to 94.1%). When such a dictionary is not available, results are worse, but still satisfac-
tory (82.4% to 85.8%). The average accuracy obtained is 89.8%.
406
Collocation translation based on sentence alignment and parsing
Source collocation Translation Source collocation Translation
express satisfaction exprimer satisfaction accroître transparence increase transparency
create condition créer condition corriger erreur *make mistake
En-Fr improve safety améliorer sécurité perdre vie lose life
transpose directive transposer directive devenir réalité become reality
draw conclusion tirer conclusion remercier collègue thank colleague
ask question porre domanda soddisfare requisito meet requirements
have opportunity avere occasione modificare direttiva amend directive
En-It vote reason *votare relazione creare situazione create situation
thank presidency ringraziare presidenza apportare contributo make contribution
congratulate Mrs. *svolgere lavoro garantire livello ensure level
achieve goal alcanzar objetivo ser placer be pleasure
address question abordar cuestión recibir respuesta receive reply
En-Es draw list hacer lista ocupar lugar take place
play role desempeñar papel suspender sesión suspend sitting
find way encontrar salida *sobrar base *draw inspiration
déployer effort compiere sforzo avere compito avoir tâche
transposer directive recepire direttiva commettere reato commettre délit
Fr-It demander parole chiedere parola approvare risoluzione adopter résolution
vacciner animal vaccinare animale prendere impegno prendre engagement
ménager effort lesinare sforzo effettuare studio mener étude
poursuivre effort continuar esfuerzo emitir dictamen donner avis
éradiquer terrorisme erradicar terrorismo examinar cuestión examiner question
Fr-Es produire électricité generar electricidad hacer distinción faire distinction
jouer rôle desempeñar papel marcar hito représenter étape
lever obstacle eliminar obstáculo traspasar frontera passer frontière
rispettare principio respetar principio promover desarrollo promuovere sviluppo
avere impressione tener impresión manifestar gratitud *ringraziare relatore
It-Es approvare posizione aprobar posición tener intención avere intenzione
rispettare impegno respetar compromiso acumular retraso accumulare ritardo
affrontare problema abordar problema hacer observación fare osservazione
TAB. 2 – Randomly chosen translation results (incorrect translations or invalid source colloca-
tions are marked with an asterisk).
The third column in Table 3 shows the method’s coverage. This corresponds, in our case, to the
ratio of collocation pairs for which a translation was proposed (70.9% on average). Our method
does not propose a translation for a collocation when there are several translation candidates
with the same frequency (previous examination of results indicated that taking all candidates in
a tie introduces more noise than good translation alternatives), or when there are no candidates
left after the two filters have been applied. This situation might occur for the lower frequency
collocations ; our translation sets contain collocations whose frequency is as low as 5–7.
Table 3 also reports the impact of frequency on our method’s performance. Accuracy and co-
verage have been computed separately for three frequency intervals (we distinguished between
high-, medium-, and low-frequency data, corresponding to the following frequency ranges: 31–
50, 16–30, and 1–15). The results obtained suggest that only a minor decrease in accuracy is
observed as the frequency decreases, while the coverage is more drastically affected.
Error analysis performed on the evaluated collocations highlighted a series of issues that affect
the performance of our method. Since we apply no restriction on the collocate other than the
407
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
Language pair Accuracy Coverage Dictionary
All 31–50 16–30 1–15 All 31–50 16–30 1–15
English-French 94.1 95.6 93.3 89.8 71.4 75.8 70.7 58.3 +
English-Italian 85.8 86.2 89.3 75.7 64.8 75.5 57.1 44.0 -
French-English 92.8 94.7 89.3 92.7 72.2 80.0 65.5 59.4 +
French-Italian 92.8 91.8 96.5 87.8 72.2 79.6 66.1 59.4 +
French-Spanish 90.9 92.0 90.9 85.7 75.0 81.5 70.8 60.9 +
Italian-English 82.4 87.6 75.2 74.1 63.6 72.9 58.3 41.5 -
Italian-French 94.1 97.0 88.9 93.1 67.8 79.2 60.0 44.6 +
Italian-Spanish 85.3 89.5 80.0 77.8 80.0 89.8 75.0 55.4 -
Average 89.8 91.8 87.9 84.6 70.9 79.3 65.4 53.0
TAB. 3 – Evaluation results (for the whole translation sets and for different frequency intervals).
syntactic filter5, our method could propose a wrong candidate if this happens to occur syste-
matically in the context of the right collocate and has the same syntactic type. For instance, a
sentence like the one in example 1 below occurs a lot in the corpus. Our method proposes an
incorrect translation for reprendre séance, namely *suspend a sitting, since suspend a sitting
occurs systematically in the context of the right candidate resume a sitting, and it has the same
syntactic type, verb-object. Moreover, it is easier to analyse than the right candidate, which is
in turn more susceptible to be missed by the parser.
1. The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.
2. This compromise formula broke the deadlock in Council and opened the door to the approval of
the negotiating directives.
Tale formula di compromesso riuscì a sbloccare la situazione di stallo nel Consiglio e spianò la
strada all’approvazione delle direttive negoziali.
3. En tant qu’homme de science, je voudrais faire une autre remarque, Monsieur le Commissaire.
As a scientist, I would like to make another point, dear Commissioner.
A more recurrent situation is that in which one of the items in a collocation is lexicalized across
languages, or the whole collocation is lexicalized, i.e., paraphrased as a single word. Example
2 shows the item situazione di stallo in the target collocation sbloccare la situazione di stallo,
which in English is lexicalized as the single word deadlock. Our method incorrectly translates
break the deadlock into sbloccare la situazione instead of sbloccare la situazione di stallo6,
since the parser does not recognize situazione di stallo as a lexical unit. Once this unit is added
in the parser’s lexicon, our method could find the good translation. An example in which the
whole source collocation is lexicalized is manifestar gratitud shown in Table 2, whose Italian
equivalent is a single word, ringraziare. Our method cannot handle such situations, and wrongly
adds an object (*ringraziare relatore) to the otherwise good verbal translation identified.
Quite frequent are also the situations in which the translation of a collocation is difficult to
find due to the free human translations the parallel corpus contains: one can find too vague
paraphrases: hold any necessary debates/ participer à tous les débats nécessaires ; omissions
of a collocation item: is to hold a debate/ avec le débat ; complete omission of the collocation:
Once we have held the debate/ À ce moment-là, etc. Similar problems are posed by the syntactic
5That is, we do not apply a semantic filter (as in the case of the base word) or finer syntactic constraints, such
as imposing a syntactic structure matching between the source and target contexts.
6Although this kind of translations can be interpreted as partly correct, we marked them as incorrect as we did
not use a gradual scale in our evaluation.
408
Collocation translation based on sentence alignment and parsing
structure changes across languages (e.g., V-N vs. V-P-N: attend meeting/ participer à reunion,
V-N vs. V-A: pay attention/ être attentif ), or, interestingly, by negation: It is no easy task/ Il
s’agit d’une rude tâche.
Clearly, the parsing and alignment errors as well as the coverage of the bilingual lexicons also
affect our method’s accuracy. If parsing and alignment errors do not influence much (as long
as they can be compensated by looking at other contexts7), dictionary coverage problems have
more drastic consequences: if a translation for a base word is missing from the dictionary and
the corpus systematically contains exactly that translation, the method cannot propose a trans-
lation for the source collocation. For instance, our French-English dictionary lists, for the entry
remarque, the following translations: remark, comment, note. However, the translation point is
also needed in order for our method to identify the translation of faire remarque from contexts
like in example 3 above, that involves the pair make point.
5 Conclusion
Thanks to the methodology used, the method we presented has several advantages over existing
collocation translation techniques. Unlike (Kupiec, 1993; van der Eijk, 1993; Dagan & Church,
1994), it can handle flexible collocations. Unlike (Smadja et al., 1996), it does not require the
postprocessing of results (lexical re-ordering), since target collocations are extracted with a par-
ser. With respect to (Lü & Zhou, 2004), it deals with more syntactic types and more languages ;
it does not depend crucially on a bilingual dictionary ; it only uses mono-lexeme translations
for the base word (since most of the times the collocate cannot be translated literally) ; and it
is considerably simpler. In addition, it only requires several sentence contexts for a collocation,
as opposed to the huge textual resources and the expensive training required by state-of-the-art
phrase aligners developed in relation with statistical translation8.
A limitation of our method is that it relies on a parallel corpus ; on the contrary, (Lü & Zhou,
2004) does not. However, in this setting our method was shown to produce quite accurate re-
sults, which suggest that adding parsing information is at least as helpful as using sophisticated
statistical techniques. The method can be improved by defining syntactic configuration map-
pings between languages (in order to account for structure changes across languages, as those
mentioned in section 4.2), by increasing the dictionaries coverage, and by including multi-word
units in the parser’s lexicon. Furthermore, its evaluation must be extended to other syntactic
types, preferably once the syntactic mappings will be defined.
Acknowledgements
Part of the research described in this paper has been supported by a grant from the Swiss Natio-
nal Science Foundation (No. 101412-103999).
7We measured the performance of our method on low-frequency data in a separate evaluation experiment, and
found that the accuracy is still acceptable for collocations occurring exactly 10 and 5 times in the corpus (85.7%
and, respectively, 72.0%), but it drops to 39.1% when frequency is equal to 3 (a number of 100 English-French
translation pairs have been investigated for each frequency level). The coverage is drastically affected (42%, 25%
and 23%). One important reason for this degradation are the unsystematic translations found in the parallel corpus.
8Note that the phrase translations produced in PBSMT (Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation) do not
have a linguistic interpretation/motivation, since a phrase simply means there any sequence of words.
409
Violeta SERETAN, Eric WEHRLI
Références
DAGAN I. & CHURCH K. (1994). TERMIGHT: Identifying and translating technical terminology.
In Proceedings of the Fourth ACL Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, Stuttgart,
Germany.
DUNNING T. (1993). Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1), 61–74.
HEID U. & RAAB S. (1989). Collocations in multilingual generation. In European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL’89), p. 130–136, Manchester, England.
KOEHN P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
The Tenth Machine Translation Summit (MT Summit X), p. 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.
KUPIEC J. (1993). An algorithm for finding noun phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In 31st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, p. 17–22, Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A.
LÜ Y. & ZHOU M. (2004). Collocation translation acquisition using monolingual corpora. In Procee-
dings of the 42nd Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’04), Main Volume, p.
167–174, Barcelona, Spain.
NERIMA L., SERETAN V. & WEHRLI E. (2003). Creating a multilingual collocation dictionary from
large text corpora. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (EACL’03), p. 131–134, Budapest, Hungary.
ORLIAC B. & DILLINGER M. (2003). Collocation extraction for machine translation. In Proceedings
of Machine Translation Summit IX, p. 292–298, New Orleans, Lousiana, U.S.A.
SAG I. A., BALDWIN T., BOND F., COPESTAKE A. & FLICKINGER D. (2002). Multiword expres-
sions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLING 2002), p. 1–15, Mexico City.
SERETAN V., NERIMA L. & WEHRLI E. (2004). A tool for multi-word collocation extraction and vi-
sualization in multilingual corpora. In Proceedings of the Eleventh EURALEX International Congress,
EURALEX 2004, p. 755–766, Lorient, France.
SERETAN V. & WEHRLI E. (2006). Multilingual collocation extraction: Issues and solutions. In
Proceedings of COLING/ACL Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, p.
40–49, Sydney, Australia. 2006.
SMADJA F. (1993). Retrieving collocations from text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 143–
177.
SMADJA F., MCKEOWN K. & HATZIVASSILOGLOU V. (1996). Translating collocations for bilingual
lexicons: a statistical approach. Computational Linguistics, 22(1), 1–38.
VAN DER EIJK P. (1993). Automating the acquisition of bilingual terminology. In Proceedings of the
sixth conference on European chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, p. 113–119,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
WANNER L., BOHNET B. & GIERETH M. (2006). Making sense of collocations. Computer Speech &
Language, 20(4), 609–624.
WEHRLI E. (2006). TwicPen: Hand-held scanner and translation software for non-native readers. In
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, p. 61–64, Sydney, Australia:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
WILLIAMS G. (2002). In search of representativity in specialised corpora: Categorisation through
collocation. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 7(1), 43–64.
WU H. & ZHOU M. (2003). Synonymous collocation extraction using translation information. In
Proceeding of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2003), p.
120–127, Sapporo, Japan.
410
