TALN 2007, Toulouse, 5-8 juin 2007

Disambiguating automatic semantic annotation
based on a thesaurus structure

Veronique MALAISI-'31, Luit GAZENDAM2, Hennie BRUGMAN3
1 Vrij e Universiteit, Amsterdam
2 Telematica Institute, Enschedé, Netherlands
3 Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands
vmalaise@few.vu.nl,Luit.Gazendam@telin.nl,
Hennie.Brugman@mpi.nl

Résumé. La relation voir/employé pour d’un thesaurus est souvent plus complexe que la
(para-)synonyrnie recommandée par l’ISO-2788, standard décrivant le contenu de ces vocabu-
laires controlés. Le fait qu’un non descripteur puisse renvoyer a plusieurs descripteurs (seuls
les descripteurs sont pertinents dans le cadre de l’indexation controlée) fait que cette relation
est complexe a utiliser dans un contexte d’ annotation automatique 2 elle génere des cas d’am-
biguité. Dans ce papier, nous présentons CARROT, un algorithme que nous avons mis au point
pour classer les résultats de notre chaine de traitements pour l’Extraction d’Information, et son
utilisation dans le cadre de la sélection du descripteur pertinent lorsque plusieurs choix sont
possibles. Cette sélection s’ adresse a des documentalistes, dans le but de simpliﬁer et d’ acce-
lérer leur travail, et se base sur la structure de leur thesaurus. Nous arrivons a un succes de
95 % dans nos suggestions; nous discutons ces résultats et présentons des perspectives a cette
expérimentation.

Abstract. The use/use for relationship a thesaurus is usually more complex than the (para-
) symonymy recommended in the ISO-2788 standard describing the content of these controlled
vocabularies. The fact that a non preferred term can refer to multiple preferred terms (only the
latter are relevant in controlled indexing) makes this relationship difﬁcult to use in automatic
annotation applications 2 it generates ambiguity cases. In this paper, we present the CARROT
algorithm, meant to rank the output of our Information Extraction pipeline, and how this al-
gorithm can be used to select the relevant preferred term out of different possibilities. This
selection is meant to provide suggestions of keywords to human annotators, in order to ease and
speed up their daily process and is based on the structure of their thesaurus. We achieve a 95 %
success, and discuss these results along with perspectives for this experiment.

Mots-clés 2 désarnbiguisation sémantique, algorithme de classement, annotation auto-
rnatique.

Keywords: word sense disambiguation, ranking algorithm, automatic annotation.
197

Véronique MALAISE, Luit GAZENDAM, Hennie BRUGMAN

1 Introduction

Thesauri are controlled vocabularies, often used for indexing and retrieving documents from
collections. The standard thesauri contain two types of elements, preferred and non preferred
terms, related with a link called use/use for. This link is considered as (para-)synonyrny in the
ISO-2788 standard (ISO, 1986) and can thus be useful for (semi-) automatic indexing appli-
cations 2 it enables a program to index a document with a preferred term (which is the type
of thesaurus based controlled annotation we are interested in) either if the document contains
an occurrence of the preferred term or if it contains occurrences of the corresponding non pre-
ferred term. In reality, this use/use for relationship is often more complex, and can generate
ambiguity problems when used “as is” in an automatic application. We present in this paper the
solution that we have developed in our project for selecting the relevant preferred term, given
an occurrence of an ambiguous non preferred term in a text. This selection algorithm is based
on the thesaurus’s structure. The thesaurus we used in this experiment is the GTAA, which is
employed for indexing and retrieving TV programs at the Netherlands Institute for Sound and
Vision, the Dutch national TV archives. Our project, CHOICE1, is collaborating with this Ins-
titute and focuses on easing and speeding up the work of cataloguers by providing them with
a ranked set of keywords referring to their thesaurus’ entries as indexing suggestions. We will
present our project’s goal and the speciﬁcity of this use case in the following section (section 2),
followed by a description of thesauri in general and the GTAA itself (section 3). In this section,
we will show the different semantics of the use/use for relationships and the problem of having
multiple links between preferred and non preferred terms. We then present our annotation pi-
peline (section 3.4), including the algorithm that we elaborated to rank the extracted keywords,
and that we propose here for selecting the relevant preferred term out of multiple possibilities
(section 3.5). Section 5 shows our experiment to evaluate this algorithm in this Word Sense
Disambiguation context. We achieved a 95 % of success, but are still facing minor and more
important problems. We discuss them and conclude with perspectives for this experiment in
section 6.

2 The CHOICE project

Charting the Irrforrrration Landscape Employing Context Irrforrrration, the CHOICE project
deals with the suggestion of metadata from textual resources to annotate video documents. In
the context of the Dutch TV archives, the cataloguers check a set of textual documents, on top
of watching the program itself, to make their descriptions. One of the goals of our project is to
build on existing Inforrrration Extraction platforms, extend and tune them to our speciﬁc needs
in order to cope with the particularities of this speciﬁc use case and provide the cataloguers
with a relevant set of keywords as indexing suggestions. Our Irrforrrration Extraction is based
on the content of the thesaurus that they are currently using at Sound and Vision, enriched and
transformed by us. We present this thesaurus in the following section, and the speciﬁcity of our
task in the section describing our ranking algorithm.

1http: //www. nwo.nl/CATCH/CHOICE

198

Disarnbiguating automatic semantic annotation based on a thesaurus structure

3 The GTAA thesaurus

3.1 A thesaurus according to the ISO 2788 standard

A thesaurus is The vocabulary of a controlled indexing language, formally organized so that
the a priori relationships between concepts (for example as “broader” and “narrower” ) are
made explicit.2

Although this deﬁnition mentions concepts, a thesaurus contains terms (preferred and non pre-
ferred terms), organized according to 5 relationships 2 broader term (BT), narrower term (NT),
related term (RT), use (U S3) and use for (UF). A preferred term is A term used consistently
when indexing to represent a given concept [...]4, whereas a non preferred term should not be
used for indexing, but is only useful at search time to point different words possibly expressing
the same idea towards the one that has been chosen to represent it in the thesaurus. In prac-
tice, as we detail in the following section, this relationship can encode different kinds of links,
as suggested by these examples : hurricane UF cyclone, insurgent UF gueri||a’s, organ UF
church organ, oven UF magnetrons, octopus UF calamary.

The other relationships should stand only between preferred terms. BT relates a term with a
more generic one, supposed to index a larger set of documents. For example Means of transpor-
tation is a BT of Bus. NT is the relationship between a term and a more speciﬁc one, that should
be used to index a subset of the documents indexed by the more generic one (Bus and School
bus). RT is a non hierarchical relationship between two terms in the same domain, as Bus and
Driver, for example.

3.2 The GTAA

The GTAA thesaurus, a Dutch acronym for “Common Thesaurus for Audiovisual Archives”,
is the controlled vocabulary used for the Sound and Vision documentation process. It contains
approximately 160.000 terms. They are divided in 6 disjoint facets 2 Keywords (about 3800
preferred terms), Locations (about 14.000), Person Names (about 97.000), Organization-Group-
Band Names (about 27.000), Maker Names (about 18.000) and Genres (113 preferred terms).
The thesaurus mainly uses constructs as presented in the ISO 2788 standard and commonly used
in companies or institutions 2 amongst others, use, use for, broader term, narrower term, related
term. Terms from all facets of the GTAA may have related terms and use for relationships,
but only Keywords and Genres can also have broader terrn/narrower term relations, organizing
them into a set of hierarchies. Additionally, Keyword terms are thematically classiﬁed in 88
subcategories of 16 top Categories (Nature, Society,...). Although the data model that is used
for the thesaurus allows links between terms across facets, no instances of these links currently
exist. This experiment concerns only automatic indexing with terms from the Keyword facet.

2(IS0, 1986), section 3-Deﬁnitions.
3In general this relationship is encoded USE, but this acronym is the one used in the GTAA.
4(ISO, 1986), section 3-Deﬁnitions.

199

Véronique MALAISE, Luit GAZENDAM, Hennie BRUGMAN

3.3 Different semantics and non uniqueness of the Use relationship

In the GTAA, there are 1377 US relationships, i.e. 1377 times a non preferred term is associated
with a preferred term. Some of these non preferred terms are associated with multiple different
preferred terms and some of the preferred term are associated with multiple non preferred terms.
In the ﬁrst case, the non preferred terms is polysernic or has different domains of application,
each meaning or domain having an explicit preferred term 2 for example, the non-preferred term
minority5 has two preferred terms, ethnical minority and religious minority. In the latter case
(one preferred term associated with different non preferred terms), different notions were grou-
ped under one common and single preferred term. This is either done for easing the thesaurus’
use (the fewer terms there are, the easier it is to ﬁnd the most appropriate one when indexing),
or because the distinction was not relevant for indexing the TV programs of Sound and Vision 2
for example, the preferred term diplomats groups two non preferred terms, ambassadors and
consuls. When having a close look at the nature of the US, UF relationship we see four different
types 2

— Synonyms 2 To cleanse US To clean

— Meronyrn 2 Sabbath US Jewish religion

— Hyponyrn 2 Scarmer US Hardware

— Semantically related 2 Geiger counter US radioactivity

83 non preferred terms are associated with more than one preferred term in the thesaurus, ran-
ging from 2 to 3 different preferred terms. This non unique association can be a source of
problems when using the thesaurus’ content as a basis for automatic indexing. If we select the
wrong preferred term, we rrright for example suggest petrol (aardolie) as an indexing term for a
document about food, because the non preferred term oil (olién) has both petrol and Vegetable
oil (plantaardige olién) as its preferred term. We will present in the next section our semi-
automatic armotation pipeline, the ranking algorithm applied to the term extraction, CARROT,
and its usefulness for selecting the right preferred term out of 2 to 3 different possibilities.

3.4 Senri-automatic armotation pipeline
3.4.1 The pipeline

As stated in section 2, the goal of the semi automatic armotation pipeline is to suggest appro-
priate indexing terms to cataloguers, with the goal of easing their job and increasing their pro-
ductivity. From discussion with the cataloguers it followed that they like a focussed and lirrrited
set of keywords 2 focussed because they only experience a suggestion as supportive if it closely
matches the main topic of the document, lirrrited because actual work process of cataloguers
only allows for a limited number of terms to be attached to a document. Another reason for that
requirement is that the inspection of the suggested terms should improve the work process, so
the inspection time and the mental processing of the suggestions need to be bounded in order
not to generate additional burdens.

The pipeline consists of tree parts 2 a term detector, a term collector and a term ranker. As input
to our pipeline we use our selected corpus and the GTAA. The output of the pipeline is a ranked

5All the terms we mention in this paper are translated from Dutch to English out of consideration for our
readers. We tried to select examples which have the same ambiguity in their semantics in the English translation

200

Disarnbiguating automatic semantic annotation based on a thesaurus structure

list of GTAA preferred terms.

3.4.2 The input : GTAA in a RDF-OWL representation

As input we use an RDF-OWL representation of the GTAA, based on the SKOS Working Draft
(see (van Assem et al., 2006) and (Miles & Brickley, 2005)). The SKOS representation of a the-
saurus is “concept based” 2 instead of terms, the entities are nodes with identiﬁers (ID), to which
labels are attached, a prefLabel to represent the preferred term, and one or more altLabel(s) to
represent the non preferred term(s). As the GTAA entries are in plural form, we also extended
this model to add the information of the singular form corresponding to the original thesaurus
terms. This model has drawbacks, and has an obvious conceptual bias, but it helps gathering
pragmatically different strings corresponding to the same armotation ID. These strings are cal-
led “textual representations of the concept” in the GATE pipeline, and we decided to keep this
terminology here.

3.4.3 The term detector : GATE with the Apolda plug-in

The term detector scans a text and looks for all possible textual representations of concepts.
The detector is built with the Apolda plug-in in GATE architecture (Maynard et al., 2003). Af-
ter tokenization, the Apolda plug-in makes a simple string matching. It armotates a piece of
text with the ID of the “concept” corresponding to the longest matching textual representation.
If for a piece of text multiple concepts have the same longest matching textual representation,
which can be the case for a non preferred term with multiple preferred terms, the plug in gene-
rates all possible armotations. This means that the string minority will receive two armotations 2
Keyword_ethnica|_minority and Keyword_re|igious_minority. The string religious mino-
rity however will only receive the latter. The term detector is not case sensitive.

3.4.4 The term collector

The outcome of the term detector is an armotated text. In this text, multiple armotations can
correspond to the same “concept”. The term collector collects all the annotation ID’s, computes
their number of occurrences and writes the output into one ﬁle.

3.5 The term ranker and WSD algorithm : CARROT

The ﬁle with ID’s and number of occurrences computed at the previous step is fed into the Clus-
ter And Rank Related to Ontology and Thesauri algorithm (CARROT algorithm) (Gazendarn
et al., 2006).

CARROT uses the fact that terms in the Keyword facet of the GTAA are related to others via the
related term, broader term and narrower term relations. We hypothesise that terms which relate
to a lot of the other terms found in the text can be semantically more representative of the core
topics of the TV program than terms which are found more often but without any relations to
others. If one of the thesaurus relationships exists between two of the found terms we say that
a relation of distance 1 exists. We also check if an intermediate term connects two terms in the

201

Véronique MALAISE, Luit GAZENDAM, Hennie BRUGMAN

GTAA. These connections via intermediate terms are deﬁned as relations of distance 2. We do
not make any distinction in the type of relationships.

To rank the extracted keywords, we use the following rules 2

— Step 1. We select the keywords with both a distance 1 and a distance 2 relation. We then order
these keywords based on their number of occurrences, putting the most frequent on top of the
list.

— Step 2. We select the remaining keywords with a distance 2 relation to keywords found during
Step 1. We order these keywords based on their number of occurrences and add them to the
list.

— Step 3. We select the remaining keywords with a relation. We order these keywords based on
their number of occurrences and add them to the list.

— Step 4. We order the remaining keywords based on their number of occurrences and add them
to the list.

This algorithm creates clusters of ranked terms (several terms can have the same rank, they are

then simply ordered alphabetically).

Our previous experiment in (Gazendam et al., 2006) showed that only the top clusters provided
relevant keywords, so we intend to present the cataloguers with only these top clusters by de-
fault, with the possibility to access the whole ranked list if they wish to. In this paper we propose
this CARROT algorithm as a means for selecting the right preferred term (right interpretation)
for a non preferred term with multiple preferred terms (an ambiguous word). For example, the
text 2" Snacks do not contain a lot of minerals." contains the non preferred term minerals and
the preferred term snacks. minerals has three preferred terms 2 food, fertilizer and ore. All
are considered to occur once, because their common non preferred term occurs once. These
three plus snacks are fed into CARROT. Due to the direct relation between the terms food and
snacks, food now ranks higher than the other two preferred terms. This means that we here
interpret minerals as referring to food in this case.

As the non preferred term attributes the same number of occurrences to all its preferred terms,

three scenarios are possible 2

— One of the preferred terms has more direct or indirect relations to other found terms and ranks
higher as a result;

— One of the preferred terms combines a higher number of occurrences due to the fact that the
preferred term appeared itself in the text or one of its other non preferred terms appeared in
the text;

— The different preferred terms rank equally high.

The output of the pipeline is the same list of annotation lD’s as the input, but ranked. Therefore,

our hypothesis for Word Sense Disambiguation is that the irrelevant preferred terms will not be

connected to any of the other found keywords, and thus will be ranked at the bottom of the list.

As a consequence, they will not be shown to the cataloguers as indexing suggestion. We present

the positioning of our experiment with the state of the art in Word Sense Disambiguation in the

following section, followed by the experiment itself.

4 Related Work

The task we are interested in in this paper can be related to Word Sense Disambiguation. In (Ide
& Véronis, 1998), the authors describe the typical two-step process for this task 2

202

Disarnbiguating automatic semantic annotation based on a thesaurus structure

1. Deﬁne the set of senses per lexical unit;

2. Use either a context-based method to determine which of the senses corresponds to the
occurrence of the lexical unit considered, or an external knowledge source.

Many works mention the use of a dictionary as an external knowledge for that purpose ((Veror1is
& Ide, 1990), for example), whereas statistically-based or machine-learning methods advertise
the corpus-based contextual approach (see for example (Yarowsky, 1995)). Of course, some
mixed approaches exist, as (Stevenson & Wilks, 2001). In our use case, the set of senses to take
into account is the set of possible preferred terms for each ambiguous non preferred term. The
method that we experiment here is using external knowledge, but instead of the lexical content
of dictionary deﬁnitions, or instead of trying to nrap the lexical environment of the external
knowledge to the corpus content, we use the thesaurus independently, and take only into ac-
count the number of occurrences of each term as a contextual information. The selection of the
relevant sense, i. e. of the relevant preferred term, is nrade only based on relationships crafted by
hand by cataloguing experts when building the thesaurus. Therefore it is still different from (Ya-
rowsky, 1992), who also based his Word Sense Disambiguation algorithm on a thesaurus.

5 The experiment

5.1 Experiment : selecting the right keyword when multiple USE rela-
tions are possible

For this experiment, we armotated our documents with all the possible preferred terms related to
the non preferred terms we found in the texts, along with their number of occurrences, and we
will check whether the algorithm designed for ranking the IE output will help us disarnbiguating
between the different possibilities. We will evaluate whether CARROT

1. Ranks the relevant preferred term higher;

2. Ranks the irrelevant preferred terms low enough for them not to be part of the keywords
suggested to the cataloguers.

5.2 Material

We constructed our corpus from a set of over 500 catalogue descriptions from Sound and V1-
sion, related to TV programs. Each of these catalogue descriptions contains speciﬁc ﬁelds, that
are described in Dublin Core 2 e. g. maker, title and keywords. One of the ﬁelds is a free text des-
cription called summary. In the Keyword ﬁeld the topic of the program is described by a linrited
set of preferred terms from GTAA’s Keyword facet. From this set of catalogue descriptions we
selected all ﬁles which 2

1. contain a non preferred terms which has multiple preferred terms and
2. have one of its related preferred terms appear in the keyword ﬁeld

Based on these requirements we selected automatically a corpus of 121 documents, of averagely
200 words each. The second requirement is related to evaluation purpose 2 the preferred term
that was chosen to describe the document can be seen as the correct interpretation of the non
preferred term present in the description text. We base ourselves on this assumption to evaluate

203

Véronique MALAISE, Luit GAZENDAM, Hennie BRUGMAN

the results of our ranking algorithm 2 the preferred term present in the Keyword ﬁeld should be
ranked higher than the other possible preferred terms.

5.3 Experiment

We ran our pipeline on our corpus. After completion we looked at the non preferred term, the
rank of all associated preferred terms in the ranked list and compared this ranked list with
the preferred term in the Keyword ﬁeld of the catalogue description. We have three possible
outcomes of this comparison 2

1. Correct suggestion 2 the suggested preferred term“ is the preferred term in the keywords
2. Wrong suggestion 2 the suggested preferred term is not the preferred term in the keywords
3. Undecidable 2 No suggestion is made because two (or all three) preferred terms rank
equally high
When evaluating the results, we also came across a set of unusable data. We discuss this point
in the following section. The results are shovm in table 1

correct undecidable wrong unusable data total
43 26 2 50 121

TAB. 1 — Results

5.3.1 Discussion

One of the issues that arose when evaluating our results was that we still have numerous unu-
sable documents in our corpus 2 it turned out that for some documents, the non preferred term
is found in the keyword ﬁeld. According to the production rules of Sound and Vision a non
preferred term carmot be used in the keyword ﬁeld, but the set of keywords changes over time 2
a preferred term may be ambiguous and as a consequence be changed to a non preferred term.
Because we used old descriptions in our corpus, some of these contained previously prefer-
red terms which now became non preferred ones in their keyword ﬁeld. This is the case, for
example, for murder assault (8 occurences) and tent kampen (23 occurences). These two
examples account for two thirds of the unusable data. We excluded these from our analysis.

For the remainder of the corpus, in approximately 19 out of 20 (95%) cases, the suggestions are
not incorrect. We found only two cases in which we gave a wrong suggestion. Both mistakes are
with the same non preferred term clubs which has as preferred terms hotel, restaurant and
cafe (HRC) and association. This word club was used in the context of football clubs. One
text was on the share issue of soccer club Ajax. The other text was on the showing of a docu-
mentary on the soccer club Ajax in a theater. The term club had the meaning of association
in both cases, referring to the soccer association. However the hotel, restaurant and cafe was
suggested. In both cases terms at distance 2 from HRC were present in the text 2 theater via
the intermediate term nightlife and director via the intermediate term enterprice. On the other
hand associations did not have direct or distance 2 connections to other extracted terms in the
football domain as soccer, supporter, match, trainer 2 the distance in the thesaurus between

‘Le. the preferred term with the highest rank in the list.
204

Disarnbiguating automatic semantic annotation based on a thesaurus structure

these terms and association was too big. In our corpus, we have two other instances of club
for which the matching to its preferred terms is successful once and undecidable another time.
Both these texts where also in the soccer domain and having the preferred term association.

This could suggest that we have one “preferential preferred term” in the corpus, and that this
information could be used for solving in a light way the ambiguity problem. Unfortunately, this
is not always the case 2 the non preferred term windmills occurs once as wind turbine and
once as mill; in both cases the correct suggestion is made by our system. Other non preferred
terms with a bigger number of occurrences also have a non regular distribution of their preferred
terms.

Another remarkable feature of the results is the big number of undecidable cases. The reason
why we encounter this big number of undecidable cases is manyfold 2

1. Our method uses general conditional rules. These conditions are not really speciﬁc 2 ha-
ving any distance I relation satisﬁes a condition. As a result, in many cases both preferred
terms ﬁt the same conditions. This can be amended by sharpening these conditions, for
example by counting the number of terms at distance 1 or distance 2.

2. The texts of our corpus are relatively small, so the number of found (and related) terms
is also small, and the number of occurrences too low to disambiguate between different
possibilities.

3. In many cases the different preferred terms have a distance 1 relation to other extracted
terms, increasing the chance of a tie. At the same time this means that the difference in
meaning between the preferred terms can be subtle, giving value to the undecidability.
For example, it is very difﬁcult and maybe not relevant to distinguish between the three
preferred terms related to toxin, namely poison, venom and dangerous substance, in
the context of a TV program about farmers getting ill after using a toxin as a form of
herbicide.

The last remark that we can make is that, due to the small number of different keywords in the
different texts, very few clusters were created. As a consequence, it was hardly ever the case that
the non relevant preferred terms found place low enough in the ranked list not to be proposed
for indexing suggestion. Therefore, we should modify our algorithm in order to make it take
into account only the preferred term with higher rank, and remove the other related preferred
terms from the suggestion list.

6 Conclusion and Perspectives

We investigated whether our method and the CARROT algorithm could be used for disambigua-
tion in an indexing setting. In cases of ambiguity, it only gives suggestions for which preferred
term to choose in two cases out of three, but when it gives a suggestion, it is correct so in ap-
proximately 19 out of 20 cases. The two bad suggestions came from the same thesaurus concept,
and were due to its lack of structure. Using another external resource like the Princeton Univer-
sity’s WordNet thesaurus could help us cope with that problem. However, the interpretation of
our success rate and percentage of undecidable cases must be subject of study 2 it is up to the
cataloguers to determine whether these numbers are fair 7. This is the subject of another study,
that we will also conduct in the course of our project.

7A success of 19 out of 20 seems quite reasonable in the perspective of IR publications, but when talking about
automatically securing railway crossings, the same success ratio is considered really had.

205

Véronique MALAISE, Luit GAZENDAM, Hennie BRUGMAN

Acknowledgements

This research was partly supported by the NWO funded CATCH program, including the
CHOICE project. We want to thank our colleagues, both at the University and at Sound and
Vision for their daily help, support and our fruitful collaboration.

Références

GAZENDAM L., MALAISE V., SCHREIBER G. & BRUGMAN H. (2006). Deriving semantic
annotations of an audiovisual program from contextual texts. In Proceedings of First Intema-
tional workshop on Semantic Web Annotations for Multimedia (SWAMM 2006).

IDE N. & VERONIS J. (1998). Introduction to the special issue on word sense disambiguation 2
The state of the art. Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 1-40.

ISO (1986). Documentation - guidelines for the establishment and development of monolin-
gual thesauri. International Organization for Standardization, ISO 2788-1986 edition.
MAYNARD D., TABLAN V. & CUNNINGHAM H. (2003). Ne recognition without training data
on a language you don’t speak. ACL Workshop on Multilingual and Mixed-language Named
Entity Recognition .' Combining Statistical and Symbolic Models.

MILES A. & BRICKLEY D. (2005). Skos core guide. 2nd W3C Public Working Draft.

STEVENSON M. & WILKS Y. (2001). The interaction of knowledge sources in word sense
disambiguation. Computational Linguistics, 27(3), 321-349.

VAN AssEM M., MALAISE V., MILES A. & SCHREIBER G. (2006). A method to convert
thesauri to skos. In Proceedings of the Third European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC’06).

VERONIS J. & IDE N. M. (1990). Word sense disambiguation with very large neural net-
works extracted from machine readable dictionaries. In Proceedings of the I 3th conference on
Computational linguistics, p. 389-394, Morristown, NJ, USA 2 Association for Computational
Linguistics.

YAROWSKY D. (1992). Word-sense disambiguation using statistical models of roget’s cate-
gories trained on large corpora. In Proceedings of I 4th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING-92).

YAROWSKY D. (1995). Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised me-
thods. In Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’ 95).

206

