Conférence TALN 1999, Cargèse, 12-17 juillet 1999
On Multicomponent TAG Parsing

Pierre Boullier

INRIA-Rocquencourt
Domaine de Voluceau
78153 Le Chesnay Cedex, France
E-mail: Pierre.Boullier@inria.fr
Résumé
The notion of mild context-sensitivity is an attempt to express the formal power needed to
define the syntax of natural languages. However, all incarnations of mildly context-sensitive
formalisms are not equivalent. On the one hand, near the bottom of the hierarchy, we find
tree adjoining grammars and, on the other hand, near the top of the hierarchy, we find mul-
ticomponent tree adjoining grammars. This paper proposes a polynomial parse time method
for multicomponent tree adjoining grammars. This method uses range concatenation grammars
as a high-level intermediate definition formalism. We show some upper bounds on the parse
time of the set-local version of multicomponent tree adjoining grammar, and we introduce a
hierarchy of restricted forms which can be parsed more efficiently. Our approach aims at giving
both a new insight into the multicomponent adjunction mechanism and at providing a practical
implementation schema.
1. Introduction
The notion of mild context-sensitivity is an attempt (see [Joshi, 1985] and [Weir, 1988])
to express the formal power needed to define the syntax of natural languages. However, all
incarnations of mildly context-sensitive formalisms are not equivalent. On the one hand, near
the bottom of the hierarchy, we find tree adjoining grammars (TAGs) [Vijay-Shanker, 1987]
and some other weakly equivalent formalisms, linear indexed grammars [Gazdar, 1985], head
grammars [Pollard, 1984] and combinatory categorial grammars [Steedman, 1987]) (see [Vijay-
Shanker and Weir, 1994] for a proof of their equivalence). On the other hand, near the top of
the hierarchy, we find multicomponent tree adjoining grammars (MC-TAGs) which are, in turn,
equivalent to linear context-free rewriting systems (LCFRS) [Vijay-Shanker, Weir, and Joshi,
1987] and multiple context-free grammars (M-CFGs) [Seki, Matsumura, Fujii, and Kasami,
1991]. This paper proposes a polynomial parse time method for MC-TAGs, which uses range
concatenation grammars (RCGs) as a high-level intermediate definition formalism.
An   extended version of this paper is in [Boullier, 1999a]

Pierre Boullier
The concept of RCG is introduced in [Boullier, 1998]; it is a syntactic formalism which is a
variant of the simple version of literal movement grammars, described in [Groenink, 1997], and
which is also related to the framework of LFP developed by [Rounds, 1988]. This formalism
is more powerful than LCFRS,1 while staying computationally tractable: its sentences can be
parsed in polynomial time. A minimal introduction to RCGs is in [Boullier, 1999c], figuring in
these proceedings, and will not be repeated here. In [Boullier, 1999c], we show how any TAG,
with unrestricted adjunction constraints, can be transformed into an equivalent RCG which can
be parsed in O
n6
time at worst. We assume that the reader is familiar with both the TAG
formalism and with the first transformation algorithm of [Boullier, 1999c]. In this paper, we
apply to MC-TAGs a generalization of this first method. This approach results in a polynomial
upper bound for the parse time of unrestricted MC-TAGs. This bound can be improved if we
restrict MC-TAGs to specific subclasses. Moreover, our approach gives a new insight into the
multicomponent adjunction mechanism while providing a practical implementation schema.

2. Multicomponent TAG
An extension of TAGs was introduced in [Joshi, Levy, and Takahashi, 1975] and later refined
in [Joshi, 1987] where the adjunction operation involves a set of auxiliary trees instead of a sin-
gle auxiliary tree. In a MC-TAG, the elementary structures, both initial and auxiliary, instead
of being two sets of single trees, consist of two finite sets of finite tree sets. In MC-TAGs, the
adjunction operation of an auxiliary tree set is defined as the simultaneous adjunction of each
of its component trees and accounts for a single step in the derivation process. This multicom-
ponent adjunction (MCA) operation is defined as follows. All the trees of an auxiliary tree set
can be adjoined into distinct nodes (addresses) in a single elementary (initial or auxiliary) tree
set.2 Of course, if the cardinality of each tree set is one, a MC-TAG is a TAG. If the maximum
cardinality of the initial tree sets is k , we have a k -MC-TAG. In [Weir, 1988], the author has
shown that the languages defined by MC-TAGs are equal to the languages defined by LCFRS.
The equivalence also holds with M-CFLs.
We can think of two types of locality for MCAs, one type, named tree locality, requires that
all trees in an auxiliary tree set adjoin to a unique tree of an elementary tree set; the other type,
named set locality, requires that all trees in an auxiliary tree set adjoin to the same elementary
tree set, not necessarily to a unique tree and not necessarily to all the trees in this elementary
tree set. We choose to cover the set-local interpretation of the term since it is more general than
the tree-local version and is the one equivalent to LCFRS.
Without loss of generality, we will prohibit (multicomponent) substitution in MC-TAGs,
assuming that this operation can always be simulated by a MCA. In TAGs, the adjunction con-
straints can be defined by the adj function which gives, for every node
, the set of auxiliary
trees which can be adjoined at
(for an optional adjunction, we have nil 2 adj
). In MC-
TAGs, for an elementary tree set, the choice of all possible MCAs will be defined by means of
functions – the set of adjunction covers – introduced below.
If N denotes the set of nodes of an elementary tree set , in order for a MCA to take
place, we first have to identify its site, the subset of N at which this MCA will occur. The
identification of all sites first results in a partition fN1 ; : : : ; Nj ; : : : ; Nm g of N in which each
1
In [Boullier, 1999b], we argue how this extra power can be used in natural language processing.
2
If the MCA operation is allowed into derived tree sets instead of elementary tree sets, we have a nonlocal
MC-TAG. This version of MC-TAGs has not yet been studied in details, and it is not known whether nonlocal
MC-TAGs are polynomially parsable (see [Becker, Joshi and Rambow, 1991]).

On MC-TAG Parsing
site Nj is the set of nodes at which a single MCA of some tree set 0 can occur. Of course, if 0
is some auxiliary tree set i , we have jNj j = j i j and if 0 = fnilg, we have jNj j = 1. Second,
for each node
2 Nj , we must know which tree of i can be adjoined at
. Thus we assume that
for each site Nj , there is a bijective mapping j from Nj to i called local adjunction cover. We
also define a function  , called adjunction cover, from N to i 2A i fnilg s.t. 8j; 1  j  m,
the restriction of  to Nj is the local adjunction cover j . For any MC-TAG, we assume that all
MCA constraints of a given elementary tree set can be expressed by a finite set of adjunction
covers.3 Thus, associated with each elementary tree set , we assume that there is a finite set
of adjunction covers. Each such adjunction cover  defines, on the one hand m local adjunction
covers 1 ; : : : ; j ; : : : ; m , and, on the other hand, an m-partition  = fN1 ; : : : ; Nj ; : : : ; Nm g
of the adjunction nodes N of , s.t. each site Nj is the definition domain dom
j
of j , and
s.t. for each node
2 N , 
2 i 2A i fnilg is the tree that is adjoined at
Now, we are ready to show that for any set-local k -MC-TAG there is an equivalent simple
2k-PRCG.

3. Set-Local MC-TAG to Simple PRCG
The transformation of a set-local MC-TAG into an equivalent simple PRCG is based upon
a generalization of the first transformation algorithm from TAG to simple PRCG proposed
in [Boullier, 1999c].
Without loss of generality, we assume that initial tree sets are singletons whose root nodes
are all labeled by the start symbol S .
As for TAGs, every node
in each individual tree is annotated. If
is a terminal (leaf)
node, it is decorated by a single symbol which is its label (a terminal symbol or "). If
is an
nonterminal (adjunction) node,4 it is decorated by two symbols: a left decoration L
and a right
decoration R
. These symbols, called LR-variables, are RCG variables which are supposed
to capture the left (resp. right) terminal yield of all the derived auxiliary trees that can be
adjoined at
. Afterwards, these decorations are all gathered into a decoration string during
a top-down left to right traversal of ; L-variables are gathered during the top-down traversal of
non-leaf nodes, while R-variables are gathered during the bottom-up traversal. Moreover, if
is an auxiliary tree, we have    = l r , where l (resp. r ), called left (resp. right) decoration
string, denotes the part of     which has been gathered before (resp. after) the traversal of the
foot node of . Afterwards, for every elementary tree set, the decoration strings of each tree are
concatenated into a single decoration string, assuming some ordering on the component trees.
For an initial tree set f g,    denotes the decoration string of that singleton. For an auxiliary
tree set i whose elements are the trees i1 , . . . , ij , . . . , ipi ; pi = j i j, its decoration string i
is the concatenation of the decoration strings ij = l ij r ij of its component trees and has thus
the form i = l i1 r i1 : : : l ij r ij : : : l ip r ip . Recall that l ij has the form Lr ij : : : Lf ij ,
i    i
while r ij has the form Rf ij : : : Rr ij if the root and the foot nodes of ij are respectively
denoted by r ij and f ij .
Now, we can state our generation algorithm. For every elementary tree set , and for every
adjunction cover  , we associate a unique clause 0 ! 1 : : : j : : : m , constructed as follows:

3
The way such a knowledge is acquired from a grammar, either by a direct specification or by some computation
from more locally defined adjunction constraints, such as the adj function, lies outside the scope of this paper.
4
Recall that substitutions are prohibited.

Pierre Boullier
If is an initial tree set f g, we have 0 = S
, where  is a string built from its
decoration string , in replacing each LR-variable L
or R
, such that 
= nil, by
the empty string (LR-variables associated with nil adjunction constraints are erased).

If is an auxiliary tree set i = f i1 ; : : : ; ij ; : : : ; ipi g, we have 0 = i
;li1 ; ;r
i1
;:::;
;l ; ;r ; : : : ; ;l ; ;r
where ;l and ;r are respectively built from l and r , the
ij    ij            ipi   ipi         ij      ij                               ij          ij
left and right decoration strings of the auxiliary tree ij , in replacing each LR-variable L

or R
, such that 
= nil, by the empty string. Note that the arity of the predicate name
i is twice the cardinality of the auxiliary tree set i , since, as for TAGs, the description
of each individual auxiliary tree takes two arguments.

Its RHS is produced analogously, whether we consider initial or auxiliary tree sets. Let
1; : : : ; j ; : : : ; m be the local adjunction covers of  and  = fN1; : : : ; Nj ; : : : ; Nmg,
Nj = dom
j
be the corresponding partition of N . For each local adjunction cover j
whose codomain codom
j
is not fnilg, if l = codom
j
= f l1 ; : : : ; lh ; : : : ; lk g,
we generate the predicate call j = l
L1 ; R1 ; : : : ; Lh ; Rh ; : : : ; Lk ; Rk
where Lh = L

and Rh = R
if lh = j
2 Nj . If codom
j
= fnilg, we have j = ".
We can easily check that this process only builds simple clauses and that the maximum arity
of its predicates is 2k , if we start from a k -MC-TAG.5
If we apply, to our case, the general formula which gives the degree d of the polynomial parse
time for a simple RCG i.e. d = maxcj 2P
kj + vj
where cj is the j th clause, vj is the number
of RCG variables within cj , and kj is the arity of its LHS predicate. For a k -MC-TAG, we have
kj  2k and, if v is the maximum number of nonterminal nodes hosting a non nil adjunction
constraint, we have vj  2v . Thus, any k -MC-TAG can be parsed at worst in O
n2
k+v

time.
4. MC-TAG parsing optimization
We first verify that this complexity result depends both on k , the number of trees in an
elementary tree set, and on v , the number of nonterminal nodes in that elementary tree set.
This relation towards k is due to the fact that, at one time, unavoidably, an auxiliary tree
set of cardinality k , defines 2k discontinuous ranges, since each auxiliary tree defines both
a left yield and a right yield. Naturally, the role of these 2k ranges is played, within the RCG
framework, by the 2k arguments of the predicate definition associated with .
On the other side, the dependence towards v is less obvious since we know that, in TAG, we
can get a parse time, the famous O
n6
, which does not depend on the form of its elementary
trees. In particular, we have shown in [Boullier, 1999c] that, within the RCG framework, this
constant parse time is reached because the decoration strings are well balanced (Dyck) strings in
which the LR-variables play the role of parentheses. Thus we can wonder whether an analogous
property holds for MC-TAGs and, in particular, whether decoration strings of elementary tree
sets are extended Dyck strings in which the parentheses are the LR-variables associated with
the MCA sites. Unfortunately, the answer is no. This comes from the fact that, in the general
case, within a tree set, its MCA nodes can be so completely interlaced that it is not possible to
isolate one MCA site, without isolating the others.
5
We will not address the correctness of the previous algorithm and we assume that it generates a PRCG which
is equivalent to the original MC-TAG.

On MC-TAG Parsing
Therefore, in [Boullier, 1999a], we propose a method which tries to replace each clause,
generated by the algorithm in Section 3, by a sequence of equivalent clauses in which the
number of variables (and hence the number of free bounds) has decreased. The basic idea of
the method is to successively partition N into subsets s.t., on the one hand, each MCA site, as
defined by the current adjunction cover, entirely lies within a unique subset, and, on the other
hand, the number of subsets minimizes the number of free bounds in its corresponding clause.
Of course, such a method may failed. However, doing so, we define a hierarchy of MC-TAG
subclasses, the c-split forms, whose parse time complexity is O
n4k+c
at worst. We note that
TAGs are 1-MC-TAGs in 2-split form.
5. Conclusion
We have shown that any set-local MC-TAG with unrestricted multicomponent adjunction
constraints can be translated into an equivalent simple PRCG. This PRCG, in turn, as any other
RCG, can be parsed in polynomial time. However, in the general case, the degree of this poly-
nomial depends both on the maximum number k of elementary trees in a tree set and on the
maximum number v of adjunction nodes in a tree set: we show that a MC-TAG can be parsed at
worst in O
n2
k+v

time. In order to release from the v parameter, we define an optimized gen-
eration algorithm which tries to minimize some value c leading to a grammar in the so-called
c-split form. For k-MC-TAGs in c-split form, the parse time of its equivalent simple PRCG is
O
n4k+c
. This c parameter depends on the way multiple component adjunctions are interlaced
within tree sets.
If we assume that, in order to be (linguistically) interesting, a MC-TAG must be at least as
powerful as a TAG, the first subclass, in the split form hierarchy, corresponds to c = 2, for we
have noticed that TAGs and 1-MC-TAGs in 2-split form are equivalent. Of course, in this case,
both parsers work in O
n6
time at worst. However, the linguistic relevance of the split form
hierarchy still has to be demonstrated though it can easily be shown that multiple agreements of
degree k (i.e. fan1 bn1 : : : ank bnk j n  1; k  2g) can be defined by a
k , 1
-MC-TAG in 0-split
form and that duplication of degree k (i.e. fw k j w 2 fa; bg ; k  2g) can also be defined
by a
k , 1
-MC-TAG in 0-split form.6 Since RCGs can be implemented very efficiently, this
approach can open the way to practical implementation of MC-TAGs. Moreover, we think that
the view of MC-TAGs as a particular case of RCGs helps to understand the multiple component
adjunction mechanism.
Références
[Becker, Joshi and Rambow, 1991] Becker T., Joshi A. and Rambow O. (1991). Long distance scram-
bling and tree adjoining grammars. In Proceedings of the fifth Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL’91), pages 21–26.
[Boullier, 1998] Boullier P. (1998). Proposal for a Natural Language Processing Syntactic Back-
bone. In Research Report No 3342 at http://www.inria.fr/RRRT/RR-3342.html, INRIA-
Rocquencourt, France, Jan. 1998, 41 pages.
[Boullier, 1999a] Boullier P. (1999). On TAG and Multicomponent TAG parsing. In Research Report
No 3668 at http://www.inria.fr/RRRT/RR-3668.html, INRIA-Rocquencourt, France, Apr.
1999, 39 pages.
6
Recall that cross agreements of degree k (i.e. fan1 1 : : : ank k bn1 1 : : : bnk k   j  1g) is a TAL.
ni

Pierre Boullier
[Boullier, 1999b] Boullier P. (1999). Chinese Numbers, MIX, Scrambling, and Range Concatenation
Grammars In Proceedings of the 9th Conference of the Europwean Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL’99), Bergen, Norway, June 8–12.
[Boullier, 1999c] Boullier P. (1999). On TAG Parsing In 6è me conférence annuelle sur le Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN’99), Cargèse, Corsica, France, July 12-17.
[Gazdar, 1985] Gazdar G. (1985). Applicability of Indexed Grammars to Natural Languages. In Techni-
cal Report CSLI-85-34, Center for Study of Language and Information, 1985.
[Groenink, 1997] Groenink A. (1997). S URFACE WITHOUT S TRUCTURE Word order and tractability
issues in natural language analysis. PhD thesis, Utrecht University, The Netherlands, Nov. 1977, 250
pages.
[Joshi, Levy, and Takahashi, 1975] Joshi A., Levy L. and Takahashi M. (1975). Tree adjunct grammars.
In Journal of Computer ans System Sciences, 10, pages 136–163.
[Joshi, 1985] Joshi A. (1985). How much context-sensitivity is necessary for characterizing structural
descriptions — Tree Adjoining Grammars. In Natural Language Processing — Theoritical, Compu-
tational and Psychological Perspective, D. Dowty, L. Karttunen, and A. Zwicky, editors, Cambridge
University Press, New-York, NY.
[Joshi, 1987] Joshi A. (1987). An Introduction to Tree Adjoining Grammars. In Mathematics of Lan-
guage, Manaster-Ramer, A., editors, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pages 87–114.
[Pollard, 1984] Pollard C. (1984). Generalized Phrase Structure Grammars, Head Grammars and Natural
Language. PhD thesis, Stanford University.
[Rounds, 1988] Rounds W. (1988). LFP: A Logic for Linguistic Descriptions and an Analysis of its
Complexity. In ACL Computational Linguistics, Vol. 14, No. 4, pages 1–9.
[Seki, Matsumura, Fujii, and Kasami, 1991] Seki H., Matsumura T., Fujii M. and Kasami T. (1991). On
multiple context-free grammars. In Theoretical Computer Science, Elsevier Science, 88, pages 191–229.
[Steedman, 1987] Steedman M. (1987). Combinatory grammars and parasitic gaps. In Natural language
and Linguistic Theory, 1987.
[Vijay-Shanker, 1987] Vijay-Shanker K. (1987). A study of tree adjoining grammars. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
[Vijay-Shanker, Weir, and Joshi, 1987] Vijay-Shanker K., Weir D. and Joshi A. (1987). Characterizing
Structural Descriptions Produced by Various Grammatical Formalisms. In Proceedings of the 25th Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’87), Stanford University, CA, pages 104–111.
[Vijay-Shanker and Weir, 1994] Vijay-Shanker K. and Weir D. (1994). The equivalence of four exten-
sions of context-free grammars. In Math. Systems Theory, Vol. 27. pages 511–546
[Weir, 1988] Weir D. (1988). Characterizing Mildly Context-Sensitive Grammar Formalisms. In PhD
thesis, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
