Conférence TALN 1999, Cargèse, 12-17 juillet 1999
Coordination and multi-relational modelling:
‘X and X’ revisited

F. Grootjen, V. Kamphuis and J. Sarbo

Computing Science Institute & Dept. of Language and Speech
University of Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9010, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
A relational model of language is developed which unifies traditional features of X-bar theory
with lexicon based modelling. It is argued that such a model provides the appropriate basis for
handling problematic cases of non-constituent coordination and gapping. A prototype imple-
mentation is discussed on the basis of six representative examples, corpus-based.
1. Introduction
The standard approach to coordination describes coordinate structures in terms of identical con-
juncts: X      X and X (henceforth: the ‘X and X’-approach). In the context of this approach,
there is some discussion as to the nature of the conjuncts X. The original view takes X to be a
syntactic category; however, there are many examples illustrating that this view cannot be up-
held. More successful alternatives describe conjuncts in terms of syntactic functions (e.g. Dik,
1968), syntactic features (e.g. GPSG, Sag et al., 1985), categorial type (Categorial Grammar,
e.g. Steedman, 1990) or a combination of these, but not all problems are solved. This is partic-
ularly true when conjuncts contain fragments of one or more constituents, as in some forms of
conjunction reduction and gapping, or when standard hierarchical structure is disrupted. As yet,
such cases seem to fall outside the scope of the ‘X and X’-approach, as there seems to be no
level of abstraction at which the conjuncts can be described (Kamphuis, 1998). Systematic anal-
ysis of the surface structure of such conjuncts showed the relevance of the syntactic relations
that their component parts are involved in. Once this level of abstraction is taken into account,
the full range of coordinate structures follows from a single rule, and the ‘X and X’-approach
can be maintained.
For the sake of clarity we add that our approach aims at an analysis in terms of surface structure.
In this article we restrict ourselves to instances of binary coordination with the coordinator and.
2. The nature of the problem
We discuss the relevant features of the problem on the basis of the following cases, derived from
a corpus of contemporary British fiction and non-fiction text.

F. Grootjen, V. Kamphuis and J. Sarbo
1. . . . the change from belief in, and fear of, an awe-inspiring and vindictive God to a con-
viction (. . . ) that there is no God provides a feeling of relief.
2. Thus a worker may be lazy and slow in a firm where he feels victimized, and a keen and
enthusiastic labourer in one that he likes.
3. The primary, and in some respects the secondary groups are exactly the opposite in their
characteristics.
4. . . . mesodermal cells characteristically migrate to the centre of the mass and ectodermal
ones to the outside.
The coordinate structures in these sentences contain increasingly complex instances of incom-
pleteness and disruption of regular hierarchical structure. In (1), the conjuncts ‘belief in’ and
‘fear of’ consist of the Noun Phrase head, together with the first element of the PP-postmodifier,
the preposition. These are not located under a single node in any representation of standard
syntactic structure. Some models describe coordinate structures of this kind by referring to ele-
ments that are lacking with respect to an immediately higher level of hierarchical structure (e.g.
by means of GPSG and HPSG’s feature SLASH which refers to missing constituents). How-
ever, this solution does not always apply. In (2), the conjuncts seem to contain an additional,
adverbial-like element with respect to some level of hierarchical structure, rather than one that
is lacking. The two categories within the conjuncts are each complete, but not directly related
to each other. Rather, they are related in different ways to the context of the coordinate structure
as a whole (the first part of each conjunct as subject complement; the second part as adverbial).
Choosing a level of abstraction to define these conjuncts is not so straightforward, even though
some parallelism in structure remains. This parallelism is no longer present in (3), in which the
insert occurs in the second conjunct only. Repetition of the determiner forces interpretation of
the insert at sentence level, rather than as modifier to the adjective ‘secondary’; nevertheless the
coordinate structure is noun phrase internal. The example shows lack of parallelism as well as
a clear mix of hierarchical levels. (4) contains a case of gapping, which always shows such lack
of parallelism. As the example shows, gapping cannot merely be defined as the avoidance of
repetition of elements (the preposition ‘to’ is repeated).
The examples illustrate that the conjuncts of a coordinate structure may contain multiple nodes
(1-4); that these nodes need not be describable in terms of a single level of hierarchical structure
(2-4); that the conjuncts need not be parallel in structure (3,4), and finally, that the nodes in a
conjunct need not be structurally contiguous (4).
In looking for the common factor that determines the surface structure of conjuncts, it can be
observed that placement of individual conjuncts in the sentential context resolves all structural
irregularities.1 For example, the combination of the conjunct ‘fear of’ and the following context
‘an awe-inspiring and vindictive God’ yields an ordinary NP-structure. This applies to all cases,
including the one of gapping when the first conjunct is analysed as containing part of the (left)
context. Whereas regular constituents in hierarchical structure are characterised by constituent
internal relations, the surface structure of conjuncts seems to be determined by external ones.
Put differently, the conjuncts of a coordinate structure do not necessarily correspond to regular
units of description themselves, but create such units together with (part of) their context.
What is needed, then, is a way to describe the units contained in the conjuncts by referring to
their potential relation with their context, rather than by saying what kind of unit the conjuncts
are themselves. This requires a shift in perspective. Traditionally, linguistic modelling takes the
1
Cf. the “substitutional generalization” mentioned by Sag et al. 1985:160; see also (Kamphuis, 1998).

Coordination and multi-relational modelling:                           ‘X and X’ revisited
definition of different, self-contained units of description as its starting point. Larger clusters
are defined by relating such units recursively, and are again self-contained. A different picture
emerges when units are not considered in themselves, but only in relation to other units. This
means that the description of the different units of analysis refers to their potential participation
in such relations, always. Larger clusters need no longer be internally related per se, as each
element still has individual status with respect to its relational potential. In this view, language
units are looked at as inherently interacting symbols, and language structure is found as the web
of their relations. We argue that a modelling method of the latter type provides the appropriate
basis for handling coordination.
3. Relational modelling
In relational modelling every unit is associated with information concerning the potential rela-
tion(s) it can participate in. Therefore, it is possible to describe the units contained in conjuncts
in relation to the context that precedes and follows the coordinate structure in the input.
There are different possibilities for referring to the relations that hold between the syntactic
units of description. One option is to take the concept of syntactic function in the sense of e.g.
(Quirk et al., 1985) and apply this to the relation as a whole, rather than associate it with one of
the participants in the relation. E.g. in the sentence Mesodermal cells characteristically migrate
to the centre of the mass (cf. example 4) there is a subject relation between ‘cells’ and ‘migrate’;
a modifier relation between ‘mesodermal’ and ‘cells’; a determiner relation between ‘the’ and
‘centre’, etc. This approach is suggested by Link Grammar (Sleator & Temperley, 1993).
With respect to the description of coordinate structures, there seems to be some support in the
data for use of a more abstract type of relation. As the following examples show, the relation
between conjuncts and context need not be the same on the functional level.

5. But Vivie has been to Newnham and owns a trained mind, capable of standing back from
and analysing sentiment.
6. He was laughing and very happy.

In (5), the noun ‘sentiment’ functions as complement to the preposition ‘from’ in the first con-
junct, and as direct object to the verb ‘analysing’ in the second. In (6), the first conjunct stands
in a verbal relation with respect to the auxiliary ‘was’, whereas the second conjunct stands in a
subject complement relation to the same verb, functioning as copula (neutralisation).2
This problem can be solved by taking into account the different syntactic properties of func-
tional relations, for example, with reference to optional or obligatory realisation of functions.
For this purpose, we may refer to the relations traditionally reflected by the different levels of
the X-bar scheme. In view of the fact that we are dealing with an analysis in terms of surface
structure, we translate the configurational definition of the three relations into a definition of
the syntactic properties associated with each unit, according to the following criteria:

̄ Can a unit occur in different syntactic environments (‘syntactic independence’), or is it
bound to a specific use? For instance, a PP can function as a modifier to a verb, or a noun,
2
GPSG and HPSG handle this type of coordinate structure by means of the feature [·PRD ], that generalises
over nominal and verbal complements in the context of the verb ‘be’. However, instances of neutralisation are not
restricted to the context of the verb ‘be’.

F. Grootjen, V. Kamphuis and J. Sarbo
or an adjective, or as an argument to a verb. An article, on the other hand, always occurs
in the context of a noun (or nominal element).
̄ Is the syntactic nature of the combination of units determined by one or both participants
in the relation?

According to these criteria, the different hierarchical levels of the X-bar scheme can be charac-
terised as follows:3

̄ Subcategorisation: the relation between a head and its obligatory arguments. Both partic-
ipants in the relation are syntactically independent. Their combination yields a unit that
syntactically differs from each of them (cf. X · subcategorised arguments yields ).
̄ Modification: the relation between a head and its optional adjuncts. Both participants in
the relation are syntactically independent. Their combination yields a unit with syntactic
properties similar to those of the head (cf. · adjuncts yields ).
̄ Specification: the relation between a specifier and its head. The specifier has no indepen-
dent syntactic status with respect to the head, i.e. it only occurs in the context of a head
of a specific type. Their combination yields a unit that syntactically differs from each of
them (cf. · specifier yields ).

Each pair can typically be analysed as functor and argument, the functor being the head in the
case of subcategorisation, and the non-head (modifier and specifier) in the two other relations.
In this way, generalisation across different functions yields a more abstract classification of
relations. Under this analysis, the relations in (5) between preposition and noun and between
transitive verb and noun are identical (subcategorisation). The same applies to (6). We argue
that a relational approach that refers to the syntactic properties associated with the relations of
the X-bar scheme creates the appropriate level of abstraction for describing coordination. In
order to avoid confusion with traditional X-bar modelling, we refer to the relations as Major
Predication (for Subcategorisation), minor predication (for Modification) and Qualification (for
Specification) respectively. With respect to the treatment of subjects, we note that the syntactic
definition given above is in line with other surface structure approaches that treat subjects as
subcategorised by the verb.4
4. A first sketch of the algorithm
In a syntactically well-formed sentence, all units are related to each other by means of one of
the relations Major Predication (MP), minor predication (mp) or Qualification (Q). The aim
of the parsing algorithm is to find these relations in the input string. To minimise the linguistic
knowledge of the algorithm itself, it refers to a dictionary that specifies different units according
to their relation potential (i.e. their combinatorial properties). For example, an intransitive
verb may take part in an MP-relation as functor, and in an mp-relation as argument. Specific
conditions with respect to the partner in the relation are specified when applicable (e.g. the
direction in which it is to be found). The relation potential of derived units is determined jointly
by that of their composite parts and the nature of the relation connecting them. Finally, we note
that technically, relations will be represented as binary relations.
3
The fourth possibility allowed by the combination of these criteria seems uninstantiated in the X-bar scheme.
4
Traditional X-bar theory treats subjects as specifiers on the level of sentence (Harlow, 1996).

Coordination and multi-relational modelling:                             ‘X and X’ revisited
To illustrate, let us again discuss example 4 up to the coordinator. Working from left to right, the
algorithm will find an mp-relation between ‘mesodermal’ and ‘cells’ and between ‘character-
istically’ and ‘migrate’; an MP-relation between ‘(mesodermal) cells’ and ‘(characteristically)
migrate’; a Q-relation between ‘the’ and ‘centre’, followed by their Major Predication with ‘to’,
followed by an mp-relation between ‘to (the centre)’ and ‘migrates’;5 a Q-relation between ‘the’
and ‘mass’, followed by their Major Predication with ‘of’, followed by an mp-relation between
‘of (the mass)’ and ‘centre’. The result of the analysis is displayed below.
Note that units can be involved in multiple re-                 MP              MP         MP
lations. We allow one of the participants in           mp          mp    mp        Q mp       Q
a relation (e.g. ‘cells’) to be the representa-
tive for the derived unit the relation creates Mes. cells char. migrate to the centre of the mass.
(‘mesodermal cells’). The default representative of a relation corresponds to the head as de-
fined earlier. Once a relation is established, only the representative may participate in another
relation. In the listing above, non-representative units within a relation are between parentheses.
5. Algorithmic aspects of coordination
We will illustrate coordination principles using the abstracted phrase structure of example 2.
Trying to describe this coordination using the standard ‘X and X’-approach fails, since the
conjuncts do not form a single node (their composite parts stand in relation to the verb rather
than to each other). The essential point in our view is that not units are coordinated, but relations.
Since both the AJP and NP are in the same
way related to V (both form an MP-relation                                         mp

with the verb) their relations can be coordi-                                 MP

nated. The same applies to the two PPs (and                            NP V [ AJP PP ] & [ NP PP ]
their minor predications). Notice the role of
MP
the verb in this example: it is the shared unit                                              mp
of the coordinated relations. This unit (hence-
forth called base unit) plays an important part                Figure 1: The coordination of relations
in the coordination algorithm.
Resuming, the relational approach is different in the following respects:

̄ There is no need for naming and identifying unrelated parts of conjuncts.
̄ It allows coordination of multiple units since the description of coordination rests on the
presence of a base unit, and base units may be involved in multiple relations.
̄ It requires that coordinated relations are of the same type (the ‘X and X’ scheme refers to
the level of relations, not of units).

The coordination algorithm is built around the parsing algorithm for non-coordinated sentences.
To illustrate the algorithm’s behaviour we take example 4 again. Upon reading the coordinator
‘and’ the algorithm first localises the base unit. Assume that this precedes the coordinator (as
in this example).6 The base unit can be found by going back in the input and testing each unit.
Since the base unit participates in all coordinated relations, the algorithm can test a unit as
follows:
5
The double role of prepositions is marked in the dictionary by the requirement that they participate in two
relations: an MP (with their complement), and an mp (with the item the resulting PP modifies).
6
If the base unit follows the coordinator, the algorithm will start to locate it upon reading the entire input.

F. Grootjen, V. Kamphuis and J. Sarbo
̄ conceptually disconnect all units related to the unit being tested;
̄ resume the parsing process, while ignoring the coordinator;
̄ upon reaching end-of-sentence, check if the relations established with this unit are of the
same type as the disconnected ones. If so, the test succeeds, otherwise it fails.
In our example the algorithm eventually tests ‘migrate’7 and conceptually disconnects the MP-
relation with ‘(mesodermal) cells’ and the mp-relation with ‘to (the centre of the mass)’. The
algorithm then finds an mp-relation between ‘ectodermal’ and ‘ones’; an MP-relation between
‘(ectodermal) ones’ and ‘migrate’; a Q-relation between ‘the’ and ‘outside’; and an MP-relation
between ‘to’ and ‘(the) outside’ followed by an mp-relation between ‘migrate’ and ‘to (the
outside)’. The comparison of the newly created relations of ‘migrate’ with the conceptually
disconnected ones shows their isomorphism.
The algorithm now con-                       MP         MP           MP
structs a mathematical em-           mp         mp mp      Q  mp        Q
bedding of the relations pre-
ceding and following the co- Mes. cells char. migr. to the cen. of the mass and ect. ones to the outs.
ordinator.    On the basis                                                          mp            Q

MP                             MP
of this embedding the rela-
mp
tional structure (shown on
the right) may be enhanced by inheritance, e.g. the mp-relation with ‘of the mass’ may be
inherited from ‘(the) centre’ to ‘(the) outside’.

6. Summary
It is argued that a relational model of language unifying traditional features of X-bar theory
with lexicon based modelling provides the appropriate basis for handling coordination. An
algorithm is outlined, and a prototype illustrated using problematic, corpus-based examples.
Future research focuses on the application of the relational approach to other problematic areas
of linguistic description, e.g. discontinuity.

References
D IK S. (1968). Coordination. Its implications for the theory of general linguistics. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
H ARLOW S. J. (1996). Generative grammar: Transformational grammar. In K. B ROWN & J. M ILLER,
Eds., Concise Encyclopedia of Syntactic Theories, p. 147–164. Oxford: Pergamon/Elsevier.
K AMPHUIS V. (1998). Coordination and surface structure. In Actes du 16è Congrès International des
Linguistes (Paris 20-25 juillet 1997). Oxford: Elsevier Sciences.
Q UIRK R., G REENBAUM S., L EECH G. & S VARTVIK J. (1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language. London and New York: Longman.
S AG I. A., G AZDAR G., WASOW T. & W EISLER S. (1985). Coordination and how to distinguish
categories. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, (3), 117–171.
S LEATOR D. D. & T EMPERLEY D. (1993). Parsing english with a link grammar. In Proceedings of the
Third International Workshop on Parsing Technologies.
S TEEDMAN M. J. (1990). Gapping as constituent coordination. Linguistics and Philosophy, (13), 207–
263.
7
Syntactically, there are other base unit candidates. We only discuss the contextually appropriate one.
