TALN 2004, Fs, 19–21 avril 2004
Tree-local MCTAG with Shared Nodes:
An Analysis of Word Order Variation in German and Korean
Laura Kallmeyer, SinWon Yoon
UFRL, University Paris 7
2 place Jussieu, Case 7003, 75251 Paris Cedex 05
{laura.kallmeyer,swyoon}@linguist.jussieu.fr
Mots-clefs – Keywords
Grammaires d’Arbres Adjoints, brouillage d’arguments, ordre des mots, allemand, coréen
Tree Adjoining Grammars, scrambling, word order, German, Korean
Résumé - Abstract
Les Grammaires d’Arbres Adjoints (TAG) sont connues pour ne pas être assez puissantes pour
traiter le brouillage d’arguments dans des langues à ordre des mots libre. Les variantes TAG pro-
posées jusqu’à maintenant pour expliquer le brouillage ne sont pas entièrement satisfaisantes.
Nous présentons ici une extension alternative de TAG, basée sur la notion du partage de noeuds.
En considerant des données de l’allemand et du coréen, on montre que cette extension de TAG
peut en juste proportion analyser des données de brouillage d’arguments, également en combi-
naison avec l’extraposition et la topicalisation.
Tree Adjoining Grammars (TAG) are known not to be powerful enough to deal with scrambling
in free word order languages. The TAG-variants proposed so far in order to account for scram-
bling are not entirely satisfying. Therefore, an alternative extension of TAG is introduced based
on the notion of node sharing. Considering data from German and Korean, it is shown that this
TAG-extension can adequately analyse scrambling data, also in combination with extraposition
and topicalization.
Kallmeyer, Yoon
1 LTAG and scrambling
Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammars (LTAG, (Joshi & Schabes, 1997)) is a tree-rewriting
formalism. An LTAG consists of a finite set of trees (elementary trees) associated with lexical
items. Larger trees are derived by substitution (replacing a leaf with a new tree) and adjunction
(replacing an internal node with a new tree). In case of an adjunction, the new elementary tree
has a special leaf node, the foot node (marked with an asterisk). When adjoining such a tree (a
so-called auxiliary tree) to a node μ, in the resulting tree, the subtree with root node μ from the
old tree is put below the foot node of the new auxiliary tree. Non-auxiliary elementary trees are
called initial trees. LTAG elementary trees represent extended projections of lexical items and
encapsulate all syntactic arguments of the lexical anchor. They are minimal in the sense that
only the arguments of the anchor are encapsulated, all recursion is factored away.
Roughly, scrambling is the permutation of elements (arguments and adjuncts) of a sentence (we
use the term scrambling in a purely descriptive sense without implying any theory of move-
ment). A special case is long-distance scrambling where arguments or adjuncts of an embedded
infinitive are ‘moved’ out of the embedded VP. This occurs for instance in languages such as
German, Hindi, Japanese and Korean. These languages are therefore often said to have a free
word order. Consider for example the German sentence (1). In (1), the accusative NP es is an
argument of the embedded infinitive zu reparieren but it precedes der Mechaniker, the subject
of the main verb verspricht and it is not part of the embedded VP. In German there is no bound
on the number of scrambled elements and no bound on the depth of scrambling (i.e., in terms
of movement, the number of VP borders crossed by the moved element). (See for example
(Rambow, 1994; Meurers, 2000; Müller, 2002) for descriptions of scrambling data.)
(1) ... dass [es]1 der Mechaniker [t1 zu reparieren] verspricht
... that it the mechanic to repair promises
‘... that the mechanic promises to repair it’
As shown in (Becker et al., 1991), TAG are not powerful enough to describe scrambling in
German in an adequate way. By this we mean that a TAG analysis of scrambling with the correct
predicate-argument structure is not possible, i.e., an analysis with each argument attaching to
the verb it depends on.
Let us consider the analysis of (1) in order to get an idea of why scrambling poses a problem for
TAG. If we leave aside the complementizer dass, elementary trees for verspricht and reparieren
might look as shown in Fig. 1. In the derivation, the verspricht-tree adjoins to the root of the
reparieren-tree and the NP der Mechaniker is substituted for the subject node of verspricht 1.
This leads to the third tree in Fig. 1. When adding es, there is a problem: it should be added to
reparieren since it is one of its arguments. But at the same time, it should precede Mechaniker,
i.e., it must be adjoined either to the root or to the NPnom node in the derived tree. The root node
belongs to verspricht and the NPnom node belongs to Mechaniker. Consequently, an adjunction
to one of them would not give the desired predicate-argument structure. If it was only for (1),
one could add a tree to the grammar for reparieren with a scrambled NP that allows adjunction
of verspricht between the NP and the verb. But as soon as there are several scrambled elements
that are arguments of different verbs, this does not work any longer. In general, it has been
shown (Joshi et al., 2000) that adopting specific elementary trees it is possible to deal with a
1The fact that der Mechaniker is at the same time logical subject of reparieren is accounted for in the semantics,
see for example (Gardent & Kallmeyer, 2003).
Tree-local MCTAG with Shared Nodes
derived tree:
NPnom VP VP VP
der M. NP NPnom VP∗ verspricht NPacc zu reparieren nom VP verspricht
der M. NPacc zu reparieren
Figure 1: TAG analysis of (1)
part of the difficult data: TAG can describe scrambling up to depth 2 (two crossed VP borders).
But this is not sufficient. Even though examples of scrambling of depth > 2 are rare, they can
occur (see Kulick, 2000).
Several TAG variants have been proposed for scrambling: Becker et al. (1991) propose non-
local MCTAG with additional dominance constraints. However, non-local MCTAG are too
powerful since it is generally assumed that they are not polynomially parsable. Another alter-
native is V-TAG (Rambow, 1994), a formalism with nicer formal properties. The problem of
V-TAG is that the expressive power of the formalism is probably too limited to deal with all nat-
ural language phenomena, since the formalism apparently cannot generate the copy language
(see Rambow, 1994, Conjecture 7, p. 78) and therefore seems not to be able to describe cross-
serial dependencies in Swiss German. D-tree substitution grammars (Rambow et al., 2001),
another TAG-variant one could use for scrambling, pose the same problem as V-TAG. Kulick
(2000) proposes Segmented Tree Adjoining Grammars for scrambling. This formalism uses a
rather complex operation on trees, segmented adjunction, that consists partly of a standard TAG
adjunction and partly of a kind of tree merging or tree unification. In this operation, two different
things get mixed up, the resource-sensitive adjoining operation of standard TAG where subtrees
cannot be identified, and the completely different unification operation. Another formalism re-
lated to TAG that has been claimed to be able to deal with scrambling is Range Concatenation
Grammar (RCG, (Boullier, 2000)). But the RCG scrambling analysis in (Boullier, 1999) as-
sumes predicate-argument dependencies between nouns and verbs to be already known before
parsing. However, these dependencies are exactly what one wants to find out when doing the
analysis. With this information already given in advance, the analysis is of course easier. So
Boullier (1999) does not present a general anaysis of scrambling.
None of the above-mentioned formalisms is entirely satisfying for scrambling, and therefore
the question of how to extend TAG in order to deal with scrambling, is still an open problem.
In this paper we propose a TAG-variant that a) can deal with scrambling and other word order
variations, b) extends the generative capacity of TAG, i.e., the set of tree adjoining languages
(containing the copy language) is a subset of the languages it generates, and c) is polynomially
parsable if one imposes some additional restriction.
In section 2, tree-local MC-TAG with shared nodes (SN-MCTAG) and in particular restricted
SN-MCTAG (RSN-MCTAG) are introduced. Section 3 to 5 show the analyses of different word
order variations using this formalism, namely scrambling, extraposition and topicalization, con-
sidering data from German and Korean.
2 Tree-local MCTAG with shared nodes (SN-MCTAG)
To illustrate the idea of shared nodes, consider again example (1). In standard TAG, nodes
to which new elementary trees are adjoined or substituted disappear, i.e., they are replaced by
Kallmeyer, Yoon
VP
  es VPVP NPacc VP
  NPnom VP verspricht ; NPnom VP verspricht
es VP∗  der M. NPacc zu rep. der M. NPacc zu reparieren

Figure 2: Derivation of (1) using shared nodes
the new elementary tree. E.g., after the derivation steps shown in Fig. 1, the root node of the
reparieren tree does not exist any longer. It is replaced by the verspricht tree and its daughters
have become daughters of the foot node of the verspricht tree. I.e., the root node of the derived
tree is considered being part of only the verspricht tree. Therefore, an adjunction at that node
is an adjunction at the verspricht tree. However, this standard TAG view is not completely
justified: in the derived tree, the root node and the lower VP node might as well be considered
as belonging to reparieren since they are results of identifying the root node of reparieren with
the root and the foot node of verspricht 2. Therefore, we propose that the two nodes in question
belong to both, verspricht and reparieren. In other words, these nodes are shared by the two
elementary trees. Consequently, they can be used to add new elementary trees to verspricht and
(in contrast to standard TAG) also to reparieren.
We use a multicomponent TAG (MCTAG, Joshi, 1987; Weir, 1988). This means that the ele-
ments of the grammar are sets of elementary trees. In each derivation step, one of these sets
is chosen and the trees in this set are added simultaneously (by adjunction or substitution) to
different nodes in the already derived tree. We assume tree-locality, i.e., the nodes to which the
trees of such a set are added must all belong to the same elementary tree. Standard tree-local
MCTAGs are strongly equivalent to TAG but they allow to generate a richer set of derivation
structures. In combination with shared nodes, tree-local multicomponent derivation extends the
weak generative power of the grammar.
Let us go back to (1). Assume the tree set on the left of Fig. 2 for es. Adopting the idea of
shared nodes, this tree set can be added to reparieren using the root of the already derived
tree for adjunction of the first tree and the NPacc node for substitution of the second tree. The
operation is tree-local since both nodes are part of the reparieren tree.
In general, the notion of shared nodes means the following: When substituting an elementary
tree α into an elementary tree γ, in the resulting tree, the root node of the subtree α is considered
being part of α and of γ. When adjoining an elementary β at a node that is part of the elementary
trees γ1, . . . , γn, then in the resulting tree, the root and foot node of β are both considered being
part of γ1, . . . , γn and β. Consequently, if an elementary γ ′ is added to an elementary γ and if
there is then a sequence of adjunctions at root or foot nodes starting from γ ′, then each of these
adjunctions can be considered as an adjunction at γ since it takes place at a node shared by γ, γ ′
and all the subsequently adjoined trees. In Fig. 2 for example the es-tree is adjoined to the root
of a tree that was adjoined to reparieren. Therefore this adjunction can be considered being an
adjunction at reparieren. An adjunction at a node where other trees already have been added
2Actually, in a Feature-Structure Based TAG (FTAG, (Vijay-Shanker & Joshi, 1988)), the top feature structure
of the root of the derived tree is the unification of the top of the root of verspricht and the top of the root of
reparieren. The bottom feature structure of the lower VP node is the unification of the bottom of the foot of
verspricht and the bottom of the root of reparieren. In this sense, the root of the reparieren tree gets split into two
parts. The upper part merges with the root node of the verspricht tree and the lower part merges with the foot node
of the verspricht tree.
Tree-local MCTAG with Shared Nodes
 
VP VP  VP 
NPnom NPdat VP V VP V  VP V VP
∗
NA VPNA
 
verspricht zu versuchen zu versuchen 
 
VP  VP 
 
 NP 
VP NP
 
NPacc V NPacc V VP
∗
NA VPNA
  
NP VP∗NA 
 
zu reparieren  zu reparieren 
Figure 3: Elementary trees for word order variations of (3)
(e.g., this adjunction of es to the root of reparieren) is called a secondary adjunction while a
first adjunction at a node is called a primary adjunction.
Concerning formal properties, SN-MCTAG is hard to compare to other local TAG-related for-
malisms since arbitrarily many trees can be added by secondary adjunction to a single elemen-
tary tree. Therefore, we define a restricted version, restricted SN-MCTAG (RSN-MCTAG) that
limits the number of secondary adjunctions to an elementary tree by allowing secondary ad-
junction only in combination with at least one simultaneous primary adjunction or substitution.
E.g., in Fig. 2, es is secondarily adjoined to reparieren while the second element of the tree set
is primarily added (substituted) to reparieren.
Obviously, all tree adjoining languages can be generated by RSN-MCTAGs since a TAG is
an MCTAG with unary multicomponent sets. It can be shown (see Kallmeyer, 2003) that fo
each RSN-MCTAGs of a specific type, equivalent LCFRSs (linear context-free rewriting sys-
tems, (Weir, 1988)) can be constructed. LCFRSs are mildly context-sensitive and in particular
polynomially parsable and therefore, this also holds for these specific RSN-MCTAGs. These
RSN-MCTAG perhaps cannot analyze all scrambling phenomena but, if the type is appropri-
ately chosen, they can analyze a sufficiently large set.
3 Scrambling
In many SOV languages, such as German, Hindi, Japanese and Korean, constituents (argument
or adjunct) display a larger freedom in term of ordering in clauses. This phenomenon is called
scrambling. (See (Uszkoreit, 1987) for a description of word order in German and (Lee, 1993)
for Korean.) The constituents of the lower clause can even occur in the upper clause, (so-called
long distance scrambling). E.g., the arguments es and jatongcha-lul of the embedded verb move
into the upper clause in German (1), repeated as (2)a., and in the Korean sentence (2)b.
(2) a. ... dass es1 der Mechaniker [ t1 zu reparieren ] verspricht
b. jatongcha-lul1 keu-ka [ t1 surihakess-tako ] yaksokhaessta
the caracc henom [ t1 repair-to ] promises
‘He promises to repair the car’
Generally, in both languages, there is no bound on the number of elements that can scramble in
one sentence, and there is no bound on the distance over which each element can scramble. In
the following we will show how RSN-MCTAG allows to deal with long distance scrambling.
Elementary trees for word order variations of (3) are shown in Fig. 3. We propose single trees
for non-scrambled elements, and tree sets for scrambled elements.
Kallmeyer, Yoon
 
VP  VP   
NP NP

acc V VP∗NA
nom NPdat VP verspricht  
VP

 zu reparieren VP verspricht 
NPnomNPdat

VP   VP  NA  VP zu versuchen
VP zu versuchen 

 

VP 
NP 


nom NPdat VP verspricht 
NPdat
  
NP 

 
nom   
NPacc zu rep. VP∗NA 
er  VP

VP  zu versuchen  dem Kunden VP∗NA

Figure 4: Derivation for (4)
(3) ... dass er dem Kunden [[das Auto zu reparieren] zu versuchen] verspricht
... that henom the customerdat the caracc to repair to try promises
‘... that he promises the customer to try to repair the car’
(4) ... dass er das Auto1 dem Kunden [[ t1 zu reparieren ] zu versuchen ] verspricht
Consider (4) where the most deeply embedded NPacc das Auto is scrambled into the upper
clause. For das Auto, the tree set is used. Further, we also use tree sets for the NPdat dem Kunden
which intervenes between the scrambled argument and its clause, and for the VP clause repari-
eren of witch argument is scrambled out over a clause of depth ≥ 2. For the non-scrambled
NPnom er, and for the non-scrambled VP versuchen, single trees are used. Fig. 4 shows the
different derivation steps for (4). First, verspricht and versuchen are combined by substitution.
In the resulting derived tree (on the right on top of the figure), the bold VP node is now shared
by verspricht and versuchen. Then the auxiliary tree in the tree set for reparieren adjoins to the
shared node. This is a primary adjunction at versuchen. The initial tree is substituted for the VP
leaf of versuchen. The former root node of the reparieren auxiliary tree, i.e., the bold VP node
in the tree in the middle of the bottom of the figure, is now shared by verspricht, versuchen and
reparieren. The next secondary adjunctions can occur at this new shared node: dem Kunden is
added as sketched in the figure, and then das Auto is added in the same way. The tree for er is
added into the substitution slot in the verspricht tree.
In German, scrambling can never proceed out of tensed clauses. However in Korean, scrambling
out of a tensed clause is possible, e.g., in (5) the argument jatongcha-lul is scrambled out of a
tensed clause. This difference can be captured by using in Korean the node label S instead of
VP for the root and the foot node in the auxiliary trees for scrambling.3
3One aspect we did not consider in this paper but that definitely needs to be spelled out is the fact that in both
languages, German and Korean, not all verbs allow scrambling to the same degree. In German, this is related to
the difference between obligatory and optionally coherent verbs (see (Meurers, 2000; Müller, 2002)). These facts
probably can be modelled using specific features that control the scrambling possibilities of a verb.
Tree-local MCTAG with Shared Nodes
  VP     
VP
 VP
∗ 
 NA
NPacc V  VP VP∗NA NPacc V
 zu rep. 
NPnom NPdat VP
 
V ;
at VPNA V zu reparieren
 
NPnom NPd
 VP  NA   
verspricht
  verspricht

Figure 5: Derivation for (6)
(5) jatongcha-lul1 keu-ka [ kokaek-i t1 kuiphaess-tako ] malhaessta.
the caracc henom [ the customernom t1 buy-that ] said
‘He said that the customer bought the car’
4 Extraposition
In German and Korean, clausal arguments can optionally appear behind the finite verb. This
is called extraposition. E.g., in (6), the reparieren VP occurs behind the finite verb verspricht.
The same goes for the Korean extraposition (7).
(6) ... dass ernom dem Kundendat t1 verspricht, [das Autoacc zu reparieren]1
‘... that he promises the customer to repair the car’
(7) keu-kanom kokaek-ekeydat t1 yaksokhassta, [jatongcha-lulacc surihakess -tako]1
‘He promises the customer to repair the car’
Extraposition is doubly unbounded, as it is the case for scrambling. In order to analyze extra-
position, we propose tree sets as the one for reparieren in Fig. 5. They resemble to those for
scrambling except that the foot node is on the left because the extraposed material goes to the
right of the finite verb. For the NP arguments in (6), we use the single trees shown in Fig. 3.
The derivation for (6) is as sketched in Fig. 5.
The following differences between German and Korean are observed: both languages allow
extraposition of complete VPs. Furthermore, in German, infinitives without their arguments
can be extraposed (so-called third construction, see (8)a), which is not possible in Korean (see
(9)a). In Korean however, arguments of embedded verbs can be extraposed while leaving their
verb behind (see (9)b), which is not possible in German (see (8)b).4
(8) a. ... dass er es t1 verspricht, [zu reparieren]1
b. ∗... dass er [ t1 zu reparieren ] verspricht, [ es ]1
(9) a. ∗keu-kanom jatongcha-lulacc t1 yaksokhassta, [ surihakess-tako]1 b. keu-kanom [ t1
surihakess-tako ] yaksokhassta, [ jatongcha-lulacc ]1
To account for the difference between (8a) and (9a), we disallow the adjunction of scrambled
elements at the root nodes of Korean auxiliary extraposition trees.5 For (9b), in Korean, we
propose additional tree sets for extraposed NPs. They are similar to the tree sets for scrambled
NPs in Fig. 3, except that the foot node is on the left. Such tree sets do not exist in German.
4For this reason, Korean extraposition is often called right-forward scrambling.
5In German, even arguments of embedded VPs can be left behind as in ... dass er [es]1 verspricht, [[ t1 zu
reparieren] zu versuchen]. For such cases, we propose an additional VP node on the spine of extraposed infitives
where deeper embedded infinitives can be added. For reason of space, we will not go into the details here.
Kallmeyer, Yoon
5 Topicalization
Korean topicalization is realized with the topic marker -nun(-un). The topicalized constituent
has to appear in the beginning of clauses, e.g., jatongcha-nun in (10a.): an element marked
by -nun(-un) can also appear in sentence medial position e.g., jatongcha-nun in (10b.). It is
perceived, in Korean, that an element with -nun(-un) in sentence initial position receives the
theme reading, i.e., topicalization, and the counterpart in sentence medial position the con-
trastive reading. To describe topicalization movement, a topic argument may be inserted into
the verbal projection tree at [Spec, CP] (see for example (Suh, 2002)).
(10) a. jatongcha-nun1 keu-ka [ t1 kuiphakess-tako ] yaksokhassta.
the cartop henom [ t1 buy-to ] promises
‘As for the car, he promises to buy (it)’
b. keu-ka jatongcha-nun kuiphakess-tako yaksokhassta.
‘He promises to buy the car’
German topicalization is more strict. German exhibits the verb second effect (V2), i.e., the finite
verb (main verb or auxiliary) occupies the second position in the clause. This divides the clause
into two parts: the part before the finite verb, the Vorfeld (VF), and the part between the finite
verb and non-finite verb, the Mittlefeld (MF). The VF must contain exactly one constituent. This
constituent is considered having moved into the VF. This movement is called topicalization.
E.g., in (11) the auxiliary verb hat appears in second position, the NPacc das Buch that moved
from the MF into the first position is topicalized.
(11) das Buch2 hat ihm1 niemand [ t1 t2 zu geben ] versucht.
the bookacc has himdat nobody [ t1 t2 to give ] tried.
‘Nobody has tried to give him the book.’
In both languages, topicalization concerns exactly one element, and the element has to appear
in the beginning of the clause, while scrambling and extraposition can occur for more than one
element. I.e., no operation to add constituents in front of topicalized element is accepted. Fur-
thermore, in German matrix clauses, topicalization is obligatory. We capture these restrictions
by certain features. The last step in a derivation for a sentence exhibiting topicalization is the
adjunction of the topicalized constituent. The feature of the final derived root node becomes
[ CPCP ]. It prevents adding other constituents at the root.6
Topicalization and scrambling can occur simultaneously as in (11) where ihm is long-distance
scrambled and das Buch is long-distance topicalized. Fig. 6 shows the derivation for (11):
Starting with the initial tree for versucht, the auxiliary tree for geben is adjoined at the root
node with top category CP and bottom category VP (we assume here feature structures as labels
with different top and bottom features), and simultaneously the initial VP tree is added into the
lower VP. After this, the [ CPVP ] root node is shared by versucht and geben. Then, niemand and
ihm are subsequently added. This gives the tree on the left of the bottom of the figure. Next,
hat is adjoined at the root which leads to a [ CPC’ ] root node shared (among others) by geben and
versucht. Finally, the topicalized element is adjoined to the root node.
6We also pursued an alternative analysis, namely putting the slot for the topicalized element (a substitution
node) and the verb it depends on in the same initial tree. I.e., the topicalized element is added by substitution while
scrambled or extraposed elements are added by adjunction. This is a more obvious way to capture the restrictions
for topicalization. Unfortunately, this approach does not work with some combinations of topicalization and
scrambling as for example [es]1 hat er [ t1 zu reparieren]2 dem Kunden [ t2 zu versuchen] versprochen.
Tree-local MCTAG with Shared Nodes
    [  CP
 
 VP
] 
  [

  VP
] 

 [ 
  
VP ] 
 
 
CP  
NP 
[  
acc NPdat VVP∗ 
VP ]  
NA NP NP VP
∗ 
NA
 acc
NPdat zu geben VPNA
 zu geben  m VP V     
NPno
NP nom VP V  niemand

 VP    versucht
 
  
NPnom 
 versucht  
 
CP CP
[ VP ] CP [ [ C’ ]C’ ] 

 CP  
ihm VP Aux VP 

∗ 
NA hat VP  NP C’
∗ 
NA 
niemand VP hat ihm VP  das Buch 
NP acc NPdat zu geben VPNA niemand VP 
NP acc 
 

 versucht NPacc zu geben versucht
Figure 6: Derivation for (11)
For topicalized elements in Korean, we propose the same kind of tree set as for German topi-
calized elements, except that the category of the foot node is unspecified. This does not fix the
position of the top element between CP and C’(as in German).
6 Conclusion
Since TAG are not powerful enough to describe scrambling data in free word order languages,
alternative formalisms are needed. The proposals made so far in the litereature are not entirely
satisfying. Therefore, we developed a new TAG extension, restricted MCTAG with shared
nodes (RSN-MCTAG). The basic idea is that, after having performed an adjunction or substitu-
tion at some node, this node does not disappear (as in standard TAG) but instead, in the resulting
derived tree, the node is shared between the old tree and the newly added tree. Consequently,
further adjunctions at that node can be considered being adjunctions at either of the trees. In
combination with tree-local multicomponent derivation, this modification of the TAG derivation
gives sufficient additional power to analyse the difficult scrambling data.
Considering data from German and Korean, we showed that RSN-MCTAG can adequately anal-
yse scrambling data, also in combination with extraposition and topicalization. The analyses
proposed in the paper treat long-distance scrambling, long-distance extraposition and long-
distance topicalization and they take into account the differences German and Korean exhibit
with respect to these phenomena.
References
BECKER T., JOSHI A. K. & RAMBOW O. (1991). Long-distance scrambling and tree adjoin-
ing grammars. In Proceedings of ACL-Europe.
Kallmeyer, Yoon
BOULLIER P. (1999). Chinese numbers, mix, scrambling, and range concatenation gram-
mars. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL’99), p. 53–60, Bergen, Norway.
BOULLIER P. (2000). Range Concatenation Grammars. In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Workshop on Parsing Technologies (IWPT2000), p. 53–64, Trento, Italy.
GARDENT C. & KALLMEYER L. (2003). Semantic Construction in FTAG. In Proceedings
of EACL 2003, Budapest.
JOSHI A. K. (1987). An introduction to Tree Adjoining Grammars. In A. MANASTER-
RAMER, Ed., Mathematics of Language, p. 87–114. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
JOSHI A. K., BECKER T. & RAMBOW O. (2000). Complexity of scrambling: A new twist to
the competence/performance distinction. In A. ABEILLÉ & O. RAMBOW, Eds., Tree Adjoin-
ing Grammars: Formalisms, Linguistic Analyses and Processing. CSLI.
JOSHI A. K. & SCHABES Y. (1997). Tree-Adjoning Grammars. In G. ROZENBERG & A.
SALOMAA, Eds., Handbook of Formal Languages, p. 69–123. Berlin: Springer.
KALLMEYER L. (2003). Tree-local multicomponent tree adjoining grammars with shared
nodes. Unpublished manuscript, University of Paris 7.
KULICK S. N. (2000). Constraining Non-local Dependencies in Tree Adjoining Grammar:
Computational and Linguistic Perspectives. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
LEE Y.-S. (1993). Scrambling as Case-driven Obligatory Movement. PhD thesis, University
of Pennsylvania. Published as technical report IRCS-93-06.
MEURERS W. D. (2000). Lexical Generalizations in the Syntax of German Non-Finite Con-
structions. PhD thesis, Universität Tübingen.
MÜLLER S. (2002). Complex Predicates: Verbal Complexes, Resultative Constructions, and
Particle Verbs in German. CSLI Stanford.
RAMBOW O. (1994). Formal and Computational Aspects of Natural Language Syntax. PhD
thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
RAMBOW O., VIJAY-SHANKER K. & WEIR D. (2001). D-Tree Substitution Grammars.
Computational Linguistics.
SUH C.-M. (2002). Topicalization and Focusing in Korean. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Korean Linguistics, p. 511–522.
USZKOREIT H. (1987). Word Order and Constituent Syntax in German. CSLI Stanford.
VIJAY-SHANKER K. & JOSHI A. K. (1988). Feature structures based tree adjoining grammar.
In Proceedings of COLING, p. 714–719, Budapest.
WEIR D. J. (1988). Characterizing mildly context-sensitive grammar formalisms. PhD thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.
