RECITAL 2004, Fès, 21 avril 2004 
Towards a rule-guided derivation of aspectual readings in Russian 
Barbara Sonnenhauser 
University of Leipzig 
Beethovenstr. 15, 04107 Leipzig, Germany  
basonne@rz.uni-leipzig.de 
Résumé – Abstract  
Les significations des expressions dans les langues naturelles sont souvent indéterminées 
(sous-spécifiées) et nécessitent d’être enrichies avant de devenir des propositions complètes. 
La sémantique générale des expressions linguistiques doit être complétée par les inférences 
pragmatiques, identifiées et captées d’une manière régulière et permettant ainsi un traitement 
opérationnel et même informatique. Cet article étudie l’indétermination de l’aspect 
imperfectif en russe et propose un cadre sémantique et pragmatique pour l’identification  de 
ses différentes valeurs sémantiques à la base de règles.  
Natural language expressions are underspecified and require enrichment to develop into full 
fledged propositions. Their sense-general semantics must be complemented with pragmatic 
inferences that have to be systematically figured out and pinned down in a principled way, so 
as to make them suitable inputs for NLP algorithms. This paper deals with the underspecified 
ipf1 aspect in Russian and introduces a semantic and pragmatic framework  that might serve 
as the basis for a rule-guided derivation of its different readings.  
Keywords – Mots Clés  
Indétermination, aspect, interprétation, sémantique, pragmatique 
Underspecification, aspect, interpretation, semantics, pragmatics 
1 Underspecification of Russian ipf Aspect 
One instance of underspecification is aspect in Russian, especially the ipf, which gives rise to 
a considerable variety of readings. These temporal and further, rather specific readings arise 
due to an interplay of information provided by different linguistic and non-linguistic sources. 
Some examples are illustrated in (1a-d) below (cf. Padučeva 1996). The defeasibility of these 
                                                 
1 ‘ipf’ = (Russian) imperfective aspect; ‘pf’ = (Russian) perfective aspect 
Barbara Sonnenhauser 
readings indicates their at least partial pragmatic character. A further difficulty for NLP 
applications is that – presuming cooperativity – any utterance can receive an interpretation by 
appropriately accommodating the context.  
(1) a. actual-processual reading 
  Kogda ja  vošel,   moj brat  čital   knigu.    
  when  I  enter:PAST:pf,  my brother   read:PAST:ipf  a book:ACC. 
 ‘When I entered, my brother was reading a book.’ 
This reading is assumed to be the default reading, requiring no additional context to arise. 
 b. general-factual reading 
Ty čital  ėtot roman?       
 you read:PAST:ipf  this novel 
  ‘Have you read this novel?’ 
This reading poses difficulties for accounts of the ipf in terms of ‘incompletedness’, as the 
event in question is completed. Here, English does not allow the progressive aspect which is 
marked for φdyn-selection (section 2) and therefore is incompatible with completedness.  
 c. potential reading 
On chorošo  igral v  šachmaty.      
 he well   play:Past:ipf chess. 
‘He could play chess very well.’ = ‘He was a good chess-player’. 
This reading arises mainly with a specific group of verbs, combined with manner adverbials. 
 d. habitual reading         
  deduška obyčno guljal   so vnukami, s nimi   igral  v futbol,
  grandpa  usually  take a walk:PAST:ipf with grandschildren, with them  play:PAST:ipf football,
  kuril  trubku, ...        
  smoke:PAST:ipf pipe, ... 
  ‘Grandpa used to go for a walk with the grandchildren, he used to play football with 
  them, he used to smoke a pipe, ... 
This reading arises with any aspectual form in the presence of adverbials of habituality. 
2 Basic semantics 
Semantically, a ‘selectional theory’ of aspect is assumed (Bickel 1996), where aspect selects 
phases (φ) or boundaries (τ). Presuming a tripartite event structure (Moens/Steedman 1988) 
consisting of preparation phase (dynamic phase φdyn), culmination point (boundary τ) and 
consequent state (static phase φstat) there are three possibilities for that selection, i.e., for 
making the selected part of the event visible and accessible for truth-conditional evaluation at 
a validation interval VI. The non-selected parts of the event are presupposed or left to 
implicatures. Note, that aspect requires a certain input, and if this input is not given by the 
verbal basis, it has to be adjusted accordingly2. The marked members of the respective 
aspectual oppositions explicitly select a certain part; the unmarked forms are sense-general, 
their meaning has to be specified semantically or pragmatically. The readings of ipf can be 
grouped according to the character of their VI, which may be retrospective or synchronous 
(bounded or unbounded, cf. Padučeva 1996) with respect to the selected part. The relation 
                                                 
2 Contrary to what an anonymous reviewer pointend out, this analysis does make the correct predictions about 
‘He is being silly’ meaning ‘He is acting silly’: the progressive requires a dynamic phase to be present, and 
this phase is pragmatically induced resulting in the respective interpretation (M-inference, cf. section 4). 
Towards a rule-guided derivation of aspectual readings in Russian 
characterizes the values ipf may acquire in interpretation.3 In most cases, VI is lexically 
specified and serves as a hint as to which group of readings (I-III) applies. The respective 
reading then is derived by means of context and world-knowledge, cf. figure 1: 
  VI Relation Reading of the ipf Aspect 
 IPF I. synchronous, bounded TT included in φdyn actual-processual 
 II. synchronous, non- TT simultaneous with habitual, inactual/continuous, potential, bounded (φdyn τ φstat) permanent, atemporal 
 III. retrospective TT includes (φdyn τ φstat) general-factual, durative 
Figure 1: Classification of the readings of Russian ipf aspect 
3 Basic pragmatics 
The pragmatic principles are Levinson’s (2000) default heuristics for interpretation based on 
the Gricean Maxims of Conversation (Grice 1989): Q-inferences are based on the first 
quantity maxim (‘make your statement as informative as possible’) and license inference to 
the negation or invalidity of a stronger expression, M-inferences stem from violations of the 
manner maxim (‘avoid prolixity’), and lincense the inference from marked expressions to 
marked interpretations. I-inferences are based on the second quantity maxim (‘do not say 
more than necessary’) and allow for inference to a stereotype. Contrary to the Gricean view, 
however, these are assumed to work also on the subpropositional level giving rise to 
‘explicatures’ (Carston 2002), which enrich underspecified lexical representation.  
Q-inferences derive the meaning of unmarked forms by giving rise to scalar implicatures 
(scale <pf, ipf>), meaning that the use or the weaker element (ipf) entitles the hearer to infer 
the non-validity of the stronger expression (pf), thereby giving rise to the three possible 
values stated above (figure 1). M-inferences occur here with mismatches between aspectual 
selector and verbal basis, i.e. with the application of a φ- or τ-selector on a basis that does not 
provide the respective feature, which hast to be induced semantically or pragmatically, 
thereby enriching the logical structure. This can be systematically captured and formalized by 
‘coercion operators’ (Thomas/Pulman 1999; Pulman 1997). I-inferences refer back to world-
knowledge, thereby enriching the lexical meaning of the aspecto-temporal forms. As 
frequently encountered concepts are more likely to get activated, they constitute the 
stereotypes to which the I-inferences are drawn.  
4 Towards a rule-guided derivation  
A list of readings has to be established (see figure 1), the factors involved their derivation 
have to be fixed and rules of interaction have to be stated that can be expressed in the 
propositional logic form A → B (cf. Vazov/Lapalme 2000). Interpretation of aspectual forms 
processes incrementally, i.e. information once provided and processed can’t be undone. Input 
factors for algorithms are the following: Verbs indexed for φ and τ they contain; lexical items 
                                                 
3 That we have indeed to distinguish between those three possibilities is indicated by a look at Turkish, which 
has morphological means to express the respective relation (cf. Sonnenhauser 2003). 
Barbara Sonnenhauser 
indexed for whether they add φ or τ and aspectual selectors indexed for what they select and 
for their status within the language specific markedness relation. That is how Q-inferences are 
drawn. VI constrains the interpretations of the unmarked aspectual partner. The default 
combinations of base and selector have to be stated, as well as rules for resolving the 
mismatches. M-inferences then can be pinned down by coercion operators (Pulman 1997; 
Thomas/Pulman 1999). More difficult is the problem of how to specify verbs for the 
commonsens knowledge they provide access to, which is indespensable for I-inference to be 
drawn. One means would be corpus analysis in order to detect regularities and coocurrences 
of lexical items that might hint to a conceptual connection. As the factor ‘probability’ can’t be 
eliminated, there is to be implemented a condition preferring the shortest line of reasoning 
(Thomas/Pulman 1999). 
The default case is a fit of basis and marker, where the verbal basis provides the necessary 
input for the marker to apply. For ipf, the conditions have to be stated under which the three 
possibilites (figure 1) get activated. Here, VI – primarily temporal or manner adverbials (e.g. 
vse boĺše ‘more and more’, chorošo ‘well’) – is decisive. Adverbials of cardinality and 
duration fix VI as retrospective and the reading as out of group III. The rule for this line of 
interpretation can be stated as follows (adopted from Vazov/Lapalme 2000): 
(4) IF ipf is applied to a verb providing a phase 
 AND if there is an adverbial fixing VI as retrospective 
 THEN the aspectual form gets a reading out of group III.  
(5) durative reading 
Ja guljala   ot  trech to pjati.       
I go-for-a-walk:PAST:ipf  from  three:Gen to five:Gen 
‘From three to five, I went for a walk.’ 
This interpretation can be overridden if VI is turned into a synchronous one by adverbials of 
the type vsegda (‘always’) or obyčno (‘usually’). 
(6) a. habitual reading 
Ja  obyčno  guljala   ot trech to pjati.     
 I  usually  go-for-walk:PAST:ipf from three:GEN to five:GEN   
 ‘I usually went for a walk from three to five.’ 
This shows the incremental way of interpretation, whereby the inner parts are left intact: 
b. [syn.unbounded obyčno [retro ot...do [syn.bounded guljal]]] 
A synchronous VI may be bounded or unbounded (group I and II, table 1), cf. (7) and (8):  
(7) IF ipf is applied to a verb providing a phase 
 AND if there is an adverbial fixing VI as synchronous bounded/unbounded 
 THEN the aspectual form gets a reading out of group I/II 
(8) a.  actual-processual reading 
V voseḿ časov, ja  čitala   knigu.     
 at eight  óclock,   I  read:Past:ipf  book:Acc    
 ‘At eight óclock, I was reading a book.’      
 b. inactual reading 
Rańše, on rabotal  v universitete.      
 before  he work:PAST:ipf  at university      
 ‘He used to work at university.’ (= ‘He was working as a teacher.’) 
Depending on the semantic representation of the verb, implicatures or presuppositions may 
arise. Ipf with the structure [φ τ] leaves the reaching of the boundary as an implicature, ipf 
with [τ φ] leaves the initial boundary as presupposition.  
Towards a rule-guided derivation of aspectual readings in Russian 
Whenever an aspectual marker is applied on a basis not providing the relevant feature (φ or τ) 
for it to apply, that feature is semantically or pragmatically induced in order to eliminate that 
mismatch. Coercion operators capture this recategorization process (Pulman 1997): 
(9) a. Ivan  vyigral  gonku.        
  Ivan  win:PAST:pf race:ACC 
  ‘Ivan won the race.’  
Here, pf is applied to a verb that provides a τ; no coercion is necessary. 
b. Ivan  vyigryval  gonku  (četyre raza).     
  Ivan  win: PAST:ipf  race:ACC (four times). 
  ‘Ivan won the race four times / was winning the race.’ 
The application of ipf in (9b) requires a φ, which the verb vyigrat́ (‘win’) does not provide. 
So it has to be induced by iteration or by zooming in on φdyn. Two  coercion operators may be 
applied: “iterate / stretch: point → process” (Pulman 1997). In most cases, context provides 
the necessary cues for disambiguation, if not, one has to rely on the ‘probability-condition’. 
 c. V vosem časov ona  uže  vyšla.      
  at eight óclock  she  already  leave:PAST:pf 
  ‘At eight óclock, she had already left.’ (= she was gone)  
For the consequent-state reading in (9c), the prefix vy- induces the boundary required for pf to 
apply. The reading arises due to the particle uže (‘already’); the coercion operator is “add-
cstate: X → <X, state>, where X is point or process” (Pulman 1997). The rules for (9b) are: 
(10) a.  IF ipf is applied to a verb providing no phase,     
  AND a lexical item indicating iteration is present     
 THEN induce the phase by application of ‘iterate’ 
 b. IF ipf is applied to a verb providing no phase 
AND and adverbial/clause indicating incidence is present   
 THEN induce the phase by application of ‘stretch’   
The application of ipf onto a verbal basis providing merely a τ (prior to coercion) is both 
pragmatically and morphologically marked, but ipf does not lose its semantic unmarkedness. 
Though interpretation in terms of coercion is compositional, the specific reading this coercion 
gives rise to dependens on linguistic context and world-knowledge (de Swart 1998); cf. (11)4:  
(11) On  rešal   zadaču.        
 he  solve:PAST:ipf  exercise:ACC       
a. actual-processual reading       
  ‘He was solving the exercise.’ 
b. conative reading        
  ‘He tried to solve the exercise.’ 
c. general-factual reading       
  ‘He solved the exercise.’ 
Whereas (c) can be disambiguated by fixing VI as retrospective, (a) and (b) cannot be 
distinguished by VI alone as both require it to be synchronous. The distinction between the 
possible readings is left to contextual disambiguation and world-knowledge. Gaining 
probability values and for interpretations by a statistical approach taking into account 
judgements of native speakers helps (Glovinskaja 1982), but the probability rankings can be 
overriden by the lexical content of verbal phrases.  
                                                 
4 The readings listed here involve different degrees of context-dependency. 
Barbara Sonnenhauser 
5 Concluding remarks 
The framework presented here allows for taking also pragmatic reasoning processes into 
account in computing interpretations. Without a principled account of inferential principles 
NLP applications have to fail. This rather sketchy picture presented here is to serve as a 
starting point for identifying semantic and pragmatic factors in the aspecto-temporal system 
of Russian. A lot of problems remain to be solved. Corpus analyses and the appropriate 
annotation of verbs, aspect markers and adverbials are the prerequisite for formulating rules 
that enable the systematic derivation and computation of the readings. Furthermore, the 
interaction of the different factors has to be studied in a wider domain, i.e. on the paragraph 
level.  
References 
Atlas, J. (1989), Philosophy without Ambiguity. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Bickel, B. (1996), Aspect, Mood and Time in Belhare. Zürich, ASAS. 
Carston, R. (2002), Thoughts and Utterances. Oxford, Blackwell 
Glovinskaja, M. J. (1982), Semantičeskije Tipy Vidovych Protivopostavlenija Russkogo 
Glagola. Moskva, Nauka. 
Grice, P. (1989), Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, Harvard University Press. 
Levinson, S. (2000), Presumptive Meanings. Cambridge, London, MIT Press. 
Moens, M., Steedman, M. (1988), Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 14/2, pp. 29-43. 
Padučeva, E. V. (1996), Semantičeskije Issledovanija. Moskva, «Jazyki russkoj kuĺtury». 
Pulman, S. (1997), Aspectual shift as type coercion. Transactions of the Philological Society, 
Vol. 95/2, pp. 279-317. 
Sonnenhauser, B. (2003), Aspect and the semantics-pragmatics interface. Proceedings of 
RANLP 03, Borovets 
de Swart, H. (1998), Aspect shift and type coercion. Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory, Vol. 16/2, pp. 347-385 
Thomas, J., Pulman, S. (1999), Bidirectional interpretation of tense and aspect. Bunt, H. et al. 
(eds), Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Computational Semantics. 
Tilburg, pp. 247-263. 
Vazov, N., Lapalme, G. (2000), Are the temporal structures of texts algorithms?. Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and 
Reasoning. Breckenridge, pp. 79-86. 
